Near-field cosmology with RR Lyrae variable stars: A first view of substructure in the southern sky

Surveying the halo for substructure is important to identify the tidal remnants of accretion events that contributed to its formation. The northern sky has seen already a lot of progress towards this goal (see review by Belokurov 2013), but the south remains quite unexplored. The CRTS with the work by Torrealba et al. (2015, from now on T15) has identified 27 overdensity candidates using RR Lyrae (RRL) variables. We started a low-resolution spectroscopic survey (R  ~  2000) using primarily the Goodman spectrograph at SOAR and the LDSS3 at Magellan. We obtained spectra to measure radial velocities and mean metallicities for the most promising targets. Radial velocities are used in addition to positional information to search for stream-like features and metallicities for the stream candidate stars are measured to properly characterize the nature of the features found as real substructures.

We have covered so far 11 out of the 27 overdensities listed in T15. We have obtained more than one spectrum for at least 50% of our target RRL stars. Radial velocities for 123 stars have been measured so far using templates from Sesar (2012), and mean metallicities have been estimated using a modified version of the ΔS method developed by Layden (1994) for 99 of our targets. The typical errors in radial velocity and mean metallicity for the sample are ~  20 km/s and ~  0.2 dex, respectively.

Figure 1 displays the RRLs in the T15 catalog (gray dots) and those observed by us (diamonds or ovals) in each of the surveyed overdensities (shaded polygons), color-coded according to their mean heliocentric distance.

Our most interesting preliminary results indicate that we have probably found the southern extension of the Virgo Stellar Stream velocity complex (Duffau et al. 2014) in Crv 1, while a bimodal radial velocity distribution in Hya 2 suggests there is indeed velocity substructure within the overdensity. Hya 1 is interesting as we have proper motion data available from the literature to combine with our radial velocities, and because in the same direction, albeit at a slightly larger heliocentric distance, a large overdensity has been identified by Casetti-Dinescu et al. (2015) as well. Ant 1 presents an extended radial velocity range with a narrow metallicity distribution, while Cen 3 has a velocity peak like the one expected for thick disk stars in the same direction of the sky. Combining our data with proper motions, information available from other tracers, models of the disruption of the Sagittarius dwarf and the smooth halo component of our galaxy will allow us to say more about the nature and origin of these overdensities. In particular we will be able to explore the relation between the largest overdensity in T15, Sgr 1, and the tidal tails of the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy.

Acknowledgments

Support for this project is provided by CONICYT's PCI program through grant DPI 20140066; by the Ministry for the Economy, Development, and Tourism's Iniciativa Cientfica Milenio through grant IC 120009, awarded to the Millennium Institute of Astrophysics; by Proyecto Fondecyt Regular #1141141; and by Proyecto Basal PFB-06/2007. C.N. and G.H. gratefully acknowledge support from CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional grants 2015-21151643 and 2014-63140099, respectively.