Introduction

Even a cursory view of images of solar system planets shows us that these planets have complex atmospheres. It is readily appreciated that not all latitudes and longitudes look alike. A view of Jupiter at 5 μm shows bright bands and spots, where, due to locally optically thin clouds, thermal emission can be seen from deeper, hotter atmospheric layers. Looking at Mars in visible light, we can often see locations obscured by thin cirrus clouds in the atmosphere, and at other locations we can see down to the surface. These different locations not only appear different to our eyes; the spectra of light that they reflect and emit also differ. When it is possible to resolve the disk of the planets under study, quite detailed levels of information can be determined: for instance, changing cloud properties with latitude, different atmospheric temperature-pressure (TP) profiles with solar zenith angle, and compositional differences in updrafts vs. downdrafts.

However, if a planet is tens of parsecs distant, there is no path to spatially resolving the visible hemisphere (with current technology). Observers probe the spectra reflected or emitted by the visible hemisphere, but there is generally little hope of assessing how diverse or uniform the visible hemisphere is. Typically, when comparing observations to the spectra from either self-consistent radiative-convective forward models Burrows07c,Fortney08a,Marley12,Barman11, or from data-driven retrievals Madhu10,Line14, the spectrum, or set of spectra, are generated and aim to represent hemispheric average conditions. However, while the calculation of such a spectrum, and its comparison to data, is relatively straightforward, it has been unclear how dependent our inferences are for TP profile structure, cloud optical depth, and chemical abundances from this important initial assumption.

Recent work on matching the spectra of some brown dwarfs and directly imaged planets points to problems with the homogeneous atmosphere assumption, with best-fit radiative-convective forward models coming from spectra generated from linear combinations of "cloudy" and "clear" atmospheres, or atmospheres with weighted areas of "thick" and "thin" clouds . The variable nature of brown dwarf thermal emission, now well documented over several years via photometry Enoch03,Artigau09,Radigan14 and spectroscopy , also indicates inhomogeneity in the visible hemisphere, with emission that changes due to rotation and/or atmospheric dynamics .

In the realm of retrievals, could a search through phase space for a best-fit to a measured spectrum lead to well-constrained yet biased or incorrect constraints on atmospheric properties when we assume planet-wide average conditions? This seems like a real possibility, and one well worth investigating in a systematic way. With the advent of higher signal-to-noise spectroscopy from the ground and the coming launch of the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), which will deliver excellent spectra for many planets over a wide wavelength range, we aim to test the 1D planet-wide average assumption systematically. We want to furthermore determine, when the data quality is high enough, if we can justify a more complex inhomogeneous model.

Recently, investigated for transmission spectra how the signal of high atmospheric metallicity inferred under planet-wide average conditions can be mimicked by a uniform lower metallicity together with a high cloud over a part of the planet's terminator. Our work here is on thermal emission and is entirely complementary. We take the first step in characterizing how a diverse visible hemisphere may impact atmospheric retrievals.

Our paper is organized as follows: Section [\ref=method] describes the setup, retrieval approach, and methodology. In Section [\ref=results], we describe our findings. In Section [\ref=w43b], we present the application to WASP-43b. We discuss our results in Section [\ref=discussion] and conclude with future expansions.

Methodology

Setup

We present a simple case to illustrate the impact of a planet's spatially varying thermal structure on retrievals. The model setup features two different TP profiles, equally weighted in surface area, in a cloud-free atmosphere with planet-wide uniform abundances. This case is relevant to two simple kinds of atmospheres. One is a "checkerboard" atmosphere of equal-area hotter and colder areas, with applicability to brown dwarfs and imaged planets. Another is a transiting planet with a hot day side and cold night side, as viewed at one-quarter or three-quarter phase, meaning half-day and half-night. The equal-weighting average allows for symmetry in viewing geometry and limb-darkening effects. Each TP profile generates emitted fluxes at the top of the atmosphere. The observed spectra result from the average of the fluxes. From these averaged spectra, we generate data as observed with typical Hubble Space Telescope (HST) Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3)+Spitzer Infrared Array Camera (IRAC) and JWST modes. We then perform atmospheric retrievals on these synthetic data assuming either a single profile (1TP) or two profiles (2TP). Figure [\ref=fig:schematic] shows the setup.

As an initial investigation, we primarily explore the role that temperature contrast has in biasing the retrieval results, specifically on hot Jupiters. The TP profiles are offset at the top of the atmosphere from each other by a factor (i.e. contrast) defined as

[formula]

where TTOA,c and TTOA,h are the top-of-atmosphere (TOA) temperatures for the cold ("night") and hot ("day") TP profiles, respectively. Under different observational setups, we (1) determine the biases in the atmospheric abundances when one global TP profile is assumed for a planet that is actually composed of two TP profiles and (2) quantitatively determine the justification for the inclusion of a second TP profile within a nested model hypothesis testing framework [\citep=trotta08] [\citep=cornish07]. In what follows, we describe the necessary tools to accomplish these tasks.

Modeling Tools

The thermal infrared radiative transfer model we use is described in detail in . It numerically solves the thermal infrared radiation problem for a plane-parallel atmosphere with absorption, emission, and no scattering given a TP profile and uniform-with-altitude gas abundances. We consider absorption due to CH4, CO2, CO, H2O, NH3, He, and H2. The molecular abundances for generating the synthetic spectra are chosen to be in rough agreement with solar elemental abundances in thermochemical equilibrium at a representative photospheric pressure (~  100 mbars) along the prescribed thermal profile. When computing the spectra for two TP profiles, we assume the dayside abundances for both, consistent with expectations from horizontal mixing [\citep=CS06] [\citep=Agundez2014]. The opacity database is described in [\citet=Freedman2014].

We set and retrieve for the temperature profiles using the [\citet=parmentier14] 5-parameter prescription (two visible opacity parameters (log γ1, log γ2), partitioning between the two visible streams (α), infrared opacity (log κIR), and the fraction of absorbed incident flux (β); see Equations 13, 14 in and Table [\ref=params]). The internal temperature, Tint, is an additional parameter we specify, but it is not one of the retrieved quantities. We fix Tint to 200K [\citep=Guillot10] which prevents the TP profiles from ever reaching 0 K. Given the molecular abundances and thermal structures, we use four point Gaussian quadrature to compute the full disk-integrated spectrum for the day and night profiles separately. By taking the average of the "hemispheres" or "checkerboard patches" and dividing by a stellar spectrum, we generate the planet-to-star flux ratios. Taking the average of the disk-integrated fluxes is equivalent to weighting each profile by the same area, thus invoking the same limb-darkening effects. Note that this need not be true in the case of hot-spot or "crescent phase" models, where there is asymmetry in limb darkening, which we will investigate in a later publication.

The high-resolution model spectra are then appropriately convolved and interpolated to the "observational" wavelength grid. Poisson noise (no systematic noise is included) is then added to each data point. For the HST WFC3+Spitzer IRAC setup, we assume error bars representative of current observations (e.g., 35 ppm error bars at 0.035 μm resolution, R~  40, for WFC3, and 70 ppm error bars for the Spitzer IRAC 3.6 and 4.5 μm channels). For the JWST observational setup, we use the noise model described in [\citet=greene2016], covering 1-11 μm and combining modes from the NIRISS, NIRCam, and MIRI instruments. This noise model simulates the uncertainties obtainable with the observation of a single transit or secondary eclipse for a hot Jupiter. We adopt planet and stellar parameters for the HD 189733 system (Table [\ref=tab:Table1]).

We use an atmospheric retrieval approach to explore the biases introduced in assuming a single TP profile for a spectrum composed of two separate TP profiles and the detectability of multiple profiles. Much of the thermal infrared retrieval machinery is based on the CHIMERA retrieval suite already described in [\citet=Line2013] and [\citet=Line14] and subsequently applied in [\citet=Kreidberg14] and [\citet=stevenson14]. However, for the Bayesian inference problem, rather than using the differential evolution Monte Carlo approach, we use the multinest algorithm [\citep=MN] as implemented with the pymultinest routine [\citep=PMN] because it not only has the ability to produce posterior samples, but it also efficiently computes the Bayesian evidence, or the integral of the posterior over the parameter volume. The Bayesian evidence is required for model comparison and selection, and it is a numerical encapsulation of the balance between goodness-of-fit and a model's simplicity. It can be thought of as the more rigorous computation of the commonly used Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). For application of the multinest algorithm and model selection to exoplanet spectra, we refer the reader to [\citet=benneke13], [\citet=waldmann15a], [\citet=waldmann15b], and [\citet=Line15]. For a summary of Bayesian model selection and evidence computation, we refer the reader to [\citet=trotta08] and [\citet=cornish07].

From the synthetic model spectra, we aim to determine the constraints on the uniform-with-altitude abundances for CH4, CO2, CO, H2O, NH3, and both of the TP profiles. We assume the same 4 "shape" parameters (two visible opacity parameters, partitioning between the two visible streams, and the infrared opacity) for both TP profiles but allow for a different ratio of the absorbed-to-incident flux (e.g., some combination of albedo and redistribution), represented by parameter β in Table [\ref=params]. . This leads to a total of 11 free parameters for the 2TP model and 10 for the 1TP model. We assume uniform-in-log10 priors for the 5 gas volume mixing ratios ranging from -12 to 0 and top-of-atmosphere temperatures ranging from zero to twice the irradiation temperature.

Results

We present our retrieval results on the synthetic spectra simulated with HST WFC3+Spitzer IRAC and JWST. For each telescope combination, we produce spectra for four levels of contrast between the two TP profiles (see Equation [\ref=toa]) of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and 0.8. For each spectrum, we perform a 1TP and a 2TP retrieval. We also test the inclusion of two TP profiles in the retrieval when only one profile was used to generate the spectrum and synthetic data. We compare the performance of the two models by the Bayes factor, summarized in Table [\ref=sigmatable]. Based on the retrievals, we can explore the biases resulting from retrieving for a single TP profile when the spectrum is generated with two. We also quantify the detectability of a second TP profile as contrast changes.

We summarize the retrieval results comparing the 1TP and the 2TP retrievals for only the extreme contrasts, 0.2 and 0.8. In our figures, we also include a flux weighted (averaging T4) profile for each contrast to guide the eye when interpreting the 1TP retrievals. One would expect a single representative TP profile to closely match the flux weighted profile. The gas abundance retrievals are summarized with a pairs-plot showing both the 1D and 2D marginalized posteriors (Figure [\ref=wfc3_08] for HST+Spitzer, and Figure [\ref=jwst_08] for JWST). The TP profiles and spectra are summarized with a median and 1-sigma spread reconstructed from 1000 randomly drawn posterior samples (Figure [\ref=wfc3_spec] for HST+Spitzer, Figure [\ref=jwst_spec] for JWST).

We note that, because we knew a priori (from test simulations) that the detection significance would be marginal for a 2nd TP profile within the HST+Spitzer setup, we tested their robustness by performing the retrievals and nested model comparison on six noise instances per contrast setup. At low detection values (less than ~  3σ), the exact detection significance is very sensitive to a particular random noise instance. Thus, in Table [\ref=sigmatable], we show a mean value and error on the results for the HST+Spitzer observational setup. This is not an issue for the JWST observational setup as the detection significances are always above a significant threshold.

Findings for Simulated HST WFC3+Spitzer IRAC Observations

Figure [\ref=wfc3_spec] and [\ref=wfc3_08] summarize the results for the 0.2 and 0.8 contrast cases. The left panel of Figure [\ref=wfc3_spec] shows the retrieved TP profiles and model spectra for the low contrast (0.2) scenario. The spectra are nearly indistinguishable. This results in our inability to robustly distinguish a 2nd TP profile as the 68% confidence envelopes for each of the two TP profiles strongly overlap with each other and with the error envelope for the single TP profile. The retrieved molecular abundance posteriors (Figure [\ref=wfc3_08], left panel) are also nearly indistinguishable between the 1 and 2TP cases. Unsurprisingly, the nested model comparison results in a non-detection for a 2nd TP profile in the 0.2 contrast scenario (Table [\ref=sigmatable]). In fact the Bayes factor, B, is less than 1 (ln B < 0) suggesting that the improvement in the spectral fit is outweighed by the increased model complexity.

At higher contrast (0.8), there is a greater deviation in the retrieved model spectra at longer wavelengths (> 2μm). The 1TP spectra have to contort themselves with a strong peak-to-trough "N"-shaped feature between 3 and 5 μm in order to fit the two IRAC points. The broadband integration over wavelength does not allow us to tell the difference between the two scenarios. The day and night TP profiles, in contrast to the 0.2 scenario, are widely separated outside of their 68% confidence intervals. However, the 68% confidence envelope of the 1TP profile largely encompasses the flux-weighted TP profile, especially over the range where the observations probe [\citep=stevenson14]. We note that the fixed internal temperature of 200 K sets a lower limit for the night side profile, while the retrieved profiles serve as an upper limit. We saw this by examining the histogram of retrieved temperatures at a certain pressure (4 mbar); the distribution is unbounded but consistent with the coldest permitted temperature. While the detection significance for the 2nd TP profile in Table [\ref=sigmatable] is higher than in the 0.2 contrast case, it is still not considered significant. However, it makes sense that an increase in contrast should result in higher evidence for a 2nd TP profile.

Perhaps the most striking find in this high-contrast scenario is the strong differences in the molecular abundance constraints, in particular that of CH4. While the 2TP scenario (the "true" model) results in an upper limit on the methane abundance, as expected given the low (non-detectable) input value used, the 1TP profile scenario results in a strong methane constraint. This strong constraint, however, is several standard deviations away from the true input abundance. In essence, assuming only one TP profile results in an artificial constraint on the methane abundance. This is a key result that we would like to highlight. The narrow constraint is due to the high sensitivity of the fit (due to the topology of the hyper-dimensional likelihood volume) to small changes in the CH4  abundance within the 1TP setup, very much like what would happen if one were to fit a constant to linear data. This is largely driven by the IRAC 3.6 μm point.

Finally, from Table [\ref=sigmatable], we find that the detection of a 2nd TP profile is below what is commonly considered significant (3-4σ), especially when considering the uncertainties, but that all contrasts greater than 0.2 are more justified in including the 2nd TP profile. The marginal detections are a result of the complex interplay between the intrinsic temperature contrast, wavelength coverage, and feature signals-to-noise. Furthermore, as a sanity check, we find evidence against (ln B  <  0) the inclusion of a 2nd TP profile when only one is used to create the spectra.

Findings for Simulated JWST data

Figure [\ref=jwst_spec] and [\ref=jwst_08] summarize the findings for 0.2 and 0.8 contrast cases. We find that for low contrast (0.2) there is not a significant bias in the retrieved molecular abundance when using one TP profile, and that the retrieved single TP profile matches the flux-averaged TP profile quite well. However, we still find a significant detection (> 5σ) of a 2nd TP profile. This suggests that fit with the single TP profile is not quite as good as the fit with two, though apparently indistinguishable by eye, even when taking into account the Occam's penalty [\citep=gregory05].

The situation changes, however, for large contrasts (0.8). The 1TP fit is noticeably worse between ~  1.6 and 3.3μm, and then again at the longest wavelengths (Figure [\ref=jwst_spec]). The shape of the spectrum is different enough with two TP profiles that a model with single TP profile simply cannot accommodate. Because WFC3+IRAC do not cover 2 - 3 μm, we would not have known that this range is sensitive to the large TP contrasts in our particular toy atmosphere. Thanks to JWST’s wavelength coverage, we see that, at large contrasts, a second profile is needed, and this profile is detected to >   20σ. Furthermore, the 1TP model results in significant abundance biases. The H2O  abundance is much higher (relative to the uncertainty) than the truth, CO is slightly underestimated, and ammonia off by ~   4 orders of magnitude, with an artificially small uncertainty. This is a cautionary note that small uncertainties on parameter values should be taken with a grain of salt if a model is inadequately fitting the data.

For the remaining contrast cases (0.4 and 0.6), we find overwhelming evidence (> 20σ) for the presence of a 2nd TP profile. We also find, as expected, that there is little evidence for a 2nd TP profile from an object with only one TP profile. All of this taken together suggests that JWST observations of thermal emission spectra will be extremely sensitive to the presence of multiple TP profiles (given reasonable observational assumptions).

Application to WASP-43 b

As an application to real observations, we test our two TP profile assumption on the well-characterized hot Jupiter WASP-43b. WASP-43b was observed as part of a large HST Legacy program (PI Jacob Bean) with WFC3 providing 3 primary transits, 2 secondary eclipses, and 3 full spectroscopic phase curves [\citep=Kreidberg14] [\citep=stevenson14]. Such phase curve observations provide a glimpse into the 3-dimensional structure of a planet as different wavelengths probe different atmospheric pressures and the different phases probe different planetary longitudes. These published results were interpreted (using CHIMERA, the same model used here) assuming a single TP profile representation for each spectrum at every phase. We now know from our synthetic tests above that, for objects with strong day-night contrasts (as WASP-43b possesses), assuming a single TP profile for a single disk-integrated spectrum may result in biased abundances. Motivated by recent full phase IRAC 3.6 and 4.5 μm observations of WASP-43b (Stevenson et al., in prep), we decided to revisit interpretation of the spectral energy distribution of non-secondary or primary eclipse phases within our newly developed two-TP profile framework. For an initial exploration, we focus on the first quarter HST WFC3+Spitzer IRAC data (eastern hemisphere). This phase represents exactly the geometry explored in above examples: half "day", half "night". We utilize the same forward model and retrieve for the identical set of molecules as on our simulated data. Figure [\ref=w43fig] summarizes the relevant results. In addition to the first quarter, we examined the third quarter (western hemisphere) as well as the day side emission data.

For the first quarter, as in our synthetic WFC3+IRAC example, we find evidence for a bias in the CH4 abundance. Assuming a single TP profile forces a solution that results in an overly well constrained methane abundance, an abundance that is a few sigma larger than anticipated from solar composition gas in thermochemical equilibrium at dayside photospheric conditions (1700K, 400 mbars). Once again, one would not expect such a good constraint given that these particular observations only provide a single measurement, the 3.6 μm band, on a methane absorption feature. However, as in the above synthetic examples, we find that the water abundance is robust against the 1 vs. 2 TP profile assumption. This is because water is primarily constrained at shorter wavelengths where the impact of including a second TP profile is minimized.

We determine the justification for the inclusion of a second TP profile by comparing the Bayesian evidence for a model with and without the second profile. Upon doing so, we determine that the second TP profile is justified at the 3.3 σ level (just below what would be considered "strong" on a Jeffery's scale [\citep=trotta08]). The Bayes factor is ln(B)  =  3.99. While this is not the strongest of detections, when combined with the CH4 bias, it warrants the inclusion of the second TP profile. We also find that the two retrieved profiles match remarkably well with the hemispheric TP profiles retrieved for the day side and night side spectra presented in [\citet=stevenson14] as well as the hottest day side profile from the General Circulation Model (GCM) in [\citet=kataria2015]. The projected spectra between 3.8 and 5 μm show the strongest divergence between the 1- and 2-TP profile fits, followed by wavelengths between 2.2 and 3.5 μm . Future higher resolution observations should focus on these spectral regions to boost the detection level of a "2nd TP profile".

When we investigated the day side emission data, the one and two TP profile scenarios yielded similar results, consistent with what we saw when the contrast is low between two profiles: on the day side, a second, cooler profile is not needed to explain the data.

We then examined the role of multiple TP profiles for the the third quarter. We found that the second TP profile is not justified by the data (2.7σ). Like the first quarter single TP profile fit, we find a well-constrained methane abundance using one profile. However, after including a second profile, the methane posterior remained constrained unlike in the case of the first quarter.

While the first and third quarters seem in conflict with regards to the impact of a second TP profile, the full phase curve for WASP-43b shows asymmetry, suggesting that the third quarter is not the exact "opposite" to the first quarter in the sense of contrast. When it comes to seeking trends or consistency throughout the phase, we have to be wary and investigate more thoroughly to differentiate what is truly representative of the atmosphere and what is the artificial manifestation of e.g., the sensitivity to the slope between band-integrated data points.

The full phase curve data of WASP-43b continue to serve as a benchmark data set in the context of the 3D nature of planets and push us to better our model interpretations, which are especially important for future exoplanet characterization observatories.

Discussion and Summary

The interpretation of exoplanet spectra is complex; the conclusions we draw about the composition, thermal structures, and other properties of exoplanet atmospheres strongly depend on our model assumptions. In this pilot study, we explored the biases in thermal structure and molecular abundances as a result of the commonly used assumption of "1D" on the interpretation of transiting exoplanet emission spectra. We generated spectra from a simple "2D" setup of a planetary hemisphere composed of two thermal profiles, representative of either a "checkerboard" hemisphere, which may physically correspond to a planet peppered with various convective cells, or a "half-and-half" planet, similar to simultaneously observing a hot day side and cooler night side. We then applied commonly used atmospheric retrieval tools under the assumption of a single 1D homogeneous hemisphere to one that is inherently "2D".

Within this setup, we explored how the biases in the abundances and 1D thermal profile are influenced by varying degrees of "contrast" between the two TP profiles for two different observational situations. We found that, for current observational setups, HST WFC3+Spitzer IRAC, while the inclusion for a 2nd thermal profile is largely unjustified within a nested Bayesian hypothesis testing framework (e.g., the fits do not improve enough to justify the additional parameter), significant biases in the abundance may exist at large contrasts. In particular we found that an artificially precise constraint on the methane abundance can be obtained when assuming a hemisphere composed of a single 1D thermal profile. For a representative JWST observational scenario (1-11 microns requiring the NIRISS, NIRCam, and MIRI instruments), we found strong evidence of a 2nd profile in all contrast cases. While little molecular abundance biases appeared to exist for the lowest contrast (0.2), significant biases exist in the water, carbon monoxide, and ammonia abundances for high contrast (0.8). We also found that the retrieval was able to accurately recover both TP profiles when included in the model.

As a practical real-world example, we tested the 1 TP vs. 2 TP profile on the first quarter phase, third quarter phase, and day side emission spectra of the hot Jupiter WASP-43b as observed with HST WFC3 [\citep=stevenson14] and Spitzer IRAC (Stevenson et al., in prep). For the dayside, the results are analogous to the low contrast synthetic cases. For the first quarter, we found, much like in our high contrast synthetic model scenarios, that a strong methane bias appears when assuming only a single 1D profile, but that the retrieved water abundance remains robust under the different assumptions. The artificially strong methane constraint is driven by the requirement to fit the IRAC 3.6μm point given only a single TP profile to work with, whereas the water abundance constraint is driven primarily by the WFC3 data of which is less impacted by the assumption of one or two TP profiles. The inclusion of a 2nd TP profile in this particular scenario is justified at the moderate to strong 3.3 σ level.

It is prudent for us to note, however, that for WASP-43b vertical mixing could potentially reproduce our single TP scenario retrieved methane abundance (~  10- 5). The abundance of methane near the base of the single TP profile at typical CH4-CO quench pressures of ~  10 bars [\citep=Moses11] [\citep=line2011] is a few ×  10- 5. So, in a sense, if we assume a single TP profile, we would arrive to the conclusion that the measured methane abundance is indicative of disequilibrium chemistry to a high degree of constraint (i.e., solar composition thermochemical equilibrium would have been ruled out at several sigma in this scenario). Instead, if we assume two TP profiles, the methane upper limit would be consistent with both pure thermochemical equilibrium at solar composition or solar composition with quenched methane. We are inclined to believe the latter scenario (two profiles) given our synthetic test cases and the fairly strong detection thresh-hold for the 2nd TP profile. The broad methane upper limit permits both chemical situations. Furthermore, [\citet=Kreidberg14] found only an upper limit on the methane abundance from the day side emission and transmission spectra of WASP-43b. Had disequilibrium methane been as present as it appeared so here, under the single TP assumption, we would have expected a similar, if not higher, degree of constraint on the methane abundance due to the slightly higher signal-to-noise of the feature during occultation.

For the third quarter, the posterior for methane remains constrained regardless of the retrieval set-up. Instead of a statement on the chemical processes present at this phase, we take this result to highlight future work that should be done to examine the effects of utilizing broadband photometric points and the consistency of retrievals for a full phase curve.

This manuscript serves as an initial investigation of the impact of spatial inhomogeneities on our interpretation of emission spectra. Much work remains to be explored, including, but not limited to the impacts of: spatially non-homogeneous molecular abundances driven by disequilibrium processes or instantaneous equilibrium, day side single or multiple "hot-spots", optically thick non-uniform clouds (like in brown dwarfs), and a more thorough sweep of the observational parameter space (wavelength coverage, signal-to-noise, resolution).

The JWST results show the potential wealth of information at wavelengths not currently probed by space-based observations. For our explored case, with its prescribed abundances and parameters, 2 - 3μm are essential in highlighting thermal contrast. It will be worthwhile to explore this behavior under different conditions. We also emphasize this characteristic because it demonstrates our ability to determine diagnostic wavelengths indicative of key features in an atmosphere with future observations in mind. Moving forward, we aim to explore how we can minimize the observational coverage needed while maximizing our inference.

Our investigation, along with the recent exploration of non-uniform terminator cloud cover by [\citet=Line15], serves to demonstrate that there is a strong need to consider the non-homogeneous nature of transiting exoplanets when interpreting their spectra. While there has been a push to develop ever more sophisticated and complicated 1D models, we have shown that even the simplest of 2D assumptions can strongly impact the models, and may even potentially dwarf the impact of the more sophisticate physics being explored in the 1D models. Moving forward, we suggest a balanced approach between complicated 1D models and simple 2D models when interpreting transit (both emission and transmission) spectra. Starting from simple models and working toward more complicated models permits us to better understand the importance of the inclusion of additional model physics [\citep=showman2011].