Selection and Characterization of Interesting Grism Spectra

Introduction

The G800L grism combined with ACS's Wide Field Camera is a powerful combination for obtaining thousands of spectra with relatively modest outlay of HST time. However, the resulting images are difficult to interpret due to a number of peculiarities including: (1) strong spatially varying sky background; (2) a position dependent wavelength solution; (3) the wide spectral response: a three dimensional flatfield and modeling of the wavelengths contributing to each pixel is required for precise flatfielding; (4) tilted spectra with respect to the CCD grid (the tilt varies over the field); (5) each source is dispersed into multiple orders resulting in much overlap - deep images become confusion limited; (6) zeroth order images of compact sources can easily mimic the appearance of sharp emission features; and (7) the low resolution (R  ≈  90 for point sources) means that only high Equivalent Width (EW) features can be discerned, while most familiar features are blends. The Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility has done an excellent job of addressing these peculiarities with the software package aXe (Pirzkal et al. 2001). Armed with it and a broad band detection image, users can extract 1D and 2D spectra that are sky-subtracted, wavelength-calibrated, flatfielded, and flux calibrated with minimum effort. Here I describe complimentary techniques I have developed to analyze WFC grism images. Specifically, I describe tools geared to finding emission line sources and supernovae (SNe). Here I concentrate on my work with the ACS GTO team to search the Hubble Deep Field North (HDFN) for Emission Line Galaxies (ELGs) and work with the PEARS team to find SNe.

Initial Processing

aXe is designed so that it can work with a stack of individual dithered exposures (the FLT or CRJ images), where the grism images have not been flatfielded nor geometrically corrected. However, both flatfielding and drizzling can be very useful. Application of the F814W flat corrects most gross blemishes and removes at least half the amplitude of large scale sky variations (after geometric correction). Spurious dark spots may remain at the blue end of some spectra, but their amplitude will be diluted if there are numerous small dithers. Their presence will have little impact on emission line searches, while their sharpness means they are unlikely to be confused with real absorption features.

Drizzle combining multiple dithered exposures is feasible as long as the dither offsets are all within 6''; then the alignment across the spectra will all be correct to within 0.5 pixels. The resultant geometrically corrected images have first order spectra that are nearly horizontal across the image, and greatly decreases the spatial variation in the wavelength solution. Drizzle combining also allows improved CR rejection, especially when done with the ACS GTO pipeline Apsis (Blakeslee et al. 2002).

A mask is used to mark or remove the zeroth order images. First the zeroth order sources in the grism image is matched to those in a broad band detection image. The sources are found with SExtractor (hereafter SE; Bertin & Arnouts, 1996) which is used to catalog the sources in both the detection and grism images. Only compact sources are matched. Their positions are used to define a linear transformation between the detection image and the zeroth order. The scaling ratio between the matched detection and zeroth order images is determined and used to model which pixels to mask. In the HDFN the the images in F775W and F850LP are typically 32 and 21 times brighter, respectively, in count rate than the zeroth order counterparts. This scaling ratio is used to determine which pixels will have zeroth order counterparts that are brighter than sky noise level. The position of these pixels in the detection image are transformed to populate a mask for the grism image which is then grown by three pixels to account for the slight dispersion in the zeroth order. Masked pixels are set to zero at the appropriate stage of the analysis.

Finding Emission Line Galaxies

The ACS Science team observations centered on the HDFN consist of 3 orbits with G800L and F850LP (z850) and two orbits with F775W (i775). Two complimentary techniques for finding ELGs were employed on this field.

A: Search 1D spectra. aXe is used to extract spectra of all SE cataloged sources in the detection image down to i775  =  26.5 ABmag. The flux calibrated spectra are then filtered by subtracting 13 pixel median smoothed spectra leaving only sharp features. Sources with peaks having S / N  >  4 are flagged as likely ELGs. The flagged spectra are classified by eye - broad absorption line sources are also flagged by this algorithm. These are usually M or K stars, but also include the two SNe in this field (Blakeslee et al. 2003) . The true ELGs have their emission lines fitted with Gaussians to derive line wavelength and flux.

B: Search 2D grism image. The basis of this method is the observation that most emission line sources appear to correspond to compact knots, not necessarily at the center of galaxies. Here we find the line emission in the grism image first and then pinpoint the emitting sources in the detection image, as illustrated in Fig. [\ref=f:grexamp]. Sharpened versions of both the grism and direct images are made by subtracting a 13×  3 median smoothed version of themselves. In the grism image, this effectively subtracts the continuum and removes cross-dispersion structure. This image is then cataloged with SE. Ribbons, typically covering five rows, centered on the y position of each source are extracted from both the sharpened grism and direct images. Since the dispersed spectrum lies primarily to the right of the direct image, the extracted ribbons extend more to the left so that all possible sources that could have created the emission line are in the direct ribbon. The ribbons are collapsed down to 1D spectra and cross correlated after the regions beyond ±   13 pixels from the source in the grism image are set to 0.0. This is done so they do not contribute to the cross-correlation amplitude. Any knot within the detection ribbon will produce a peak in the cross-correlation spectrum. The position of the peak yields the offset between the knot and the line emission in the grism image. Using the wavelength solution for the grism, in principle one could derive the line wavelength from this offset. Instead, final measurements of the emission line quantities are obtained from 1D spectra of each knot extracted with aXe using the cross-correlation determined position of the star forming knot. As with method A, the emission line properties are measured with Gaussian fits to the spectra.

In the HDFN field we found 30:39 ELGs with methods A:B. For the most part, the same galaxies are found; 7:16 ELGs were uniquely found with methods A:B. For three ELGs we identified multiple emission line knots with method B. Figure [\ref=f:mhist] compares the i775 apparent magnitude distribution of the merged list of ELGs from our analysis compared to galaxies with spectroscopic and photometric redshifts in the same field. The grism ELGs, found with three orbits of HST time, are on average fainter than the galaxies with spectroscopic redshifts gathered over several years from the Keck 10m telescopes.

Line Identification

Line identification is a major concern. Only seven of the ELGs in HDFN have two emission lines in our data. In those cases the lines can be identified using the ratio of wavelengths which remains invariant with redshift. However one must be careful with this technique since λHα  /  λ[OIII]  =  1.3138 is close to λHβ  /  λ[OII]  =  1.3041. A one pixel (42Å) uncertainty in both line wavelengths could result in an incorrect line identification.

The remaining sources only have one line. The dispersion is too low to split the doublet, the 4959,5007Å lines are also blended, as is H and the doublet. With only one line, at the grism's resolution, then a good first guess redshift is crucial for line identification. Drozdovsky et al. (2005) tackle this problem, in part, by looking at the size of the host galaxies. However, size alone is not a great indicator of redshift - there is little evolution in angular size for z  >  0.2. Our approach is to use photometric redshifts as the first guess redshift. This results in line identifications for 37 of the 39 single line ELGs.

Figure [\ref=f:zgr] compares grism redshifts with spectroscopic redshifts, in panel a, and spectroscopic versus photometric redshifts in panel b. Taking the spectroscopic redshifts as "truth" results in 1/15 : 3/19 misidentified lines with methods A:B. This is similar to the error rates from photometric redshifts, as can be discerned from Fig. [\ref=f:zgr]b. The dispersion about the zgrism versus zspec unity line, excluding the outliers is 0.016:0.009 for methods A:B. Method B is probably more accurate because it better pinpoints the location of line emission. This compares to a dispersion about the unity line in zphot versus zspec (after clipping outliers) of 0.073, 0.107, 0.082 for zphot estimates from Capak (2004), Fernandez-Soto et al. (1999), and our own photometric redshifts respectively. Thus grism redshifts are nearly an order of magnitude more accurate than photometric redshifts.

Finding Supernovae

The two SNe discovered in the HDFN have broad absorption features, distinctly different from Galactic stars, and are easily visible in our grism spectra (Blakeslee et al. 2003) demonstrating the viability of grism surveys for SNe searches. The PEARS team has obtained 200 orbits of HST time primarily to characterize high-redshift objects in the two GOODS fields using the WFC and G800L grism. An additional aim is to search for SNe on a rapid turn-around basis. The total exposure time at each pointing/roll angle is about twice as long as the HDFN observations described above. However, only shallow broad-band images are obtained concurrently with the grism exposures. These are used to align the grism images to the astrometric grid of the GOODS fields. But they are not as deep as the grism image, hence they may not reveal SNe. So although aXe spectra are generated of the prior GOODS cataloged sources, they are not useful for finding SNe at later epochs.

What is needed is a method to find SNe using only the grism images. To this aim I have developed an IDL package SHUNT (Supernovae Hunt) to find and classify the first order spectra of all compact sources in a grism field. As before, the starting point is geometrically corrected, combined grism images. Since most source cataloging codes (i.e.  SE) have been developed to find compact blobs, they do not work so well for finding grism spectra which are very extended, often at near the noise level of the image. Rather than optimizing the code to fit the data, SHUNT makes the data suit the code by squashing (rebinning) the image 25  ×  1 per output pixel before cataloging with SE. This results in first order spectra being close to critically sampled in the x direction. The resultant catalog is filtered to remove small sources (typically zeroth order images) and extended sources (galaxies). The remaining ~   250 sources are then classified. Five rows centered on each source are collapsed to form a spectrum (which is not wavelength calibrated). Classification is by eye where the classifier (me) examines figures such as Fig [\ref=f:snexamp] showing the 2D spectrum, the collapsed 1D spectrum, a cross dispersion trace and the squashed grism image. Each source is classified as either SN, unidentified absorption spectrum, probable M or K star, break spectrum, emission line source, featureless, non-first order spectrum, or spurious (the order is of decreasing interest, and roughly of increasing occurrence rate). Direct postage stamp images from GOODS (or the shallow broad-band images) are generated with a rectangular error box plotted which should contain the source. An empty error box in the prior GOODS image is a second indication of a transitory source. It typically takes 0.5 to 1 hour to classify all the objects in a field.

One problem with this approach is that it can miss SNe blended with galaxy spectra. This is more likely to occur for late time SNe spectra which can have low S/N and/or be featureless at grism resolution. An example is shown in Fig [\ref=f:faintsn]. One way such objects can be found is to subtract model spectra of the sources cataloged by GOODS using aXe v1.5 (Kümmel, this volume). The models are very good but not perfect. However, subtraction of the smoothed residuals is sufficient to isolate faint transient object spectra from the model residuals.

Summary

The ACS grism produces amazingly rich datasets. While the data are somewhat difficult to interpret, tools have been developed to make the most use of these data. Public access tools like aXe are readily available to remove most of these complications and extract 1D and 2D spectra. Here I have shown how some common manipulations of the data (such as geometric correction and flatfielding) allow interesting sources such as emission line galaxies and supernovae to be efficiently found.