Impersonation with the Echo Protocol

Introduction

Knowing the physical location of an entity can be very useful. Such knowledge is useful for location-based access control or context-aware applications [\cite=bertino:sacmat2005] [\cite=covington:sacmat2001] [\cite=kaasinen:puc2003]. However, we must be able to ensure that we have the correct location of an entity for it to be a useful factor in access control.

Location determination is the problem of finding out where an entity is located at. In contrast, location verification verifies that an entity is indeed located at where it claims to be, where the entity somehow finds out the location by some other means. If the location determination mechanism is insecure, then we can use secure location verification to ensure that an entity is located at a certain location.

The Echo protocol [\cite=sastry:wise2003] is an inexpensive location verification mechanism. It is a packet-based distance bounding protocol [\cite=brands:eurocrypt1993] which takes advantage of physical limits imposed by the speeds of light and sound. It is able to guarantee that a certain entity is located within a certain region.

In this paper, we will show that the Echo protocol is vulnerable to impersonation attacks. We describe the Echo protocol in section [\ref=sec:echo-protocol]. In section [\ref=sec:impersonation] we detail the vulnerability, while section [\ref=sec:defense] suggests modifications to the protocol which help defend against impersonation attacks.

The Echo protocol

In Sastry et al. [\cite=sastry:wise2003], which introduces the Echo protocol, the entity wishing to prove its location claim is called the prover, while the entity which wishes to verify the claim is called the verifier. The protocol verifies that the prover is located within a region centered around the verifier, which is called the verifier's region of acceptance. The protocol basically works by measuring the round trip time of signals between the verifier and the prover. A round trip time that is too long would imply that the prover is far away from the verifier. A complete description is shown in figure [\ref=fig:echo].

The prover initiates verification by broadcasting its location. A verifier whose region of acceptance includes the location is selected. The verifier sends a nonce, which is a random bit string, to the prover by radio. After receiving the nonce, the prover sends it back to the verifier by ultrasound. If the nonce received by the prover is not the same as the one it sent, or if it took too long for the reply to be received, then the prover's location claim is rejected.

A reply is too late if it arrives later than what would be expected from the signal travel time and processing delays at the prover. The time required for a radio signal to reach claimed location l from verifier v is [formula], where c is the speed of light and d(v,l) is the distance between v and l. The time required for a sound signal to reach v from l is [formula], where s is the speed of sound. With a maximum delay Δp for the prover to respond to a message it receives, it should take no longer than [formula] for the verifier to receive a reply.

The prover should be unable to predict the nonce the verifier sends, so it cannot send back a reply before the nonce is received from the verifier. Therefore, if the prover is not inside the verifier's region of acceptance, it will take too much time for the reply to arrive at the verifier. This fact ensures that the prover must indeed be within the region it claims to be if its location claim is verified with the Echo protocol.

The Echo protocol itself does not require cryptography or time synchronization between provers and verifiers. It only needs a reasonably precise clock in the verifier and the means to communicate with radio and sound. It also does not require prearranged setup between verifiers and provers. This makes the protocol suitable for low-powered devices in spontaneous environments, e.g.  ubiquitous computing or sensor networks [\cite=kindberg:pervasive2002] [\cite=hill:cacm2004].

Impersonation attack

The fact that the Echo protocol does not require prearranged setup nor cryptography is touted as an advantage. However, the protocol in its original form is unable to verify location claims in a useful way under these conditions. The problem is not that the protocol falsely verifies a location claim for a prover, but rather that anything else is unable to securely take advantage of the verification result.

An obvious way to use the Echo protocol for access control is to first verify the location of the prover, and then to grant access to the prover based on this verification result. The specific steps are outlined more concretely as follows, where we assume that the verifier also handles access control:

The verifier confirms the location claim of the prover.

The prover sends an access request to the verifier.

The verifier grants access to the prover.

One thing to note is that in the original paper, the prover's identity is not included explicitly in the messages sent between the verifier and the prover during location verification. However, we cannot simply ignore the identity, since the verifier would later on have no way of knowing whether an access request comes from the same object whose location was verified. Thus we will assume that the prover's identity is included with all messages during location verification. Incidentally, this also helps provers and verifiers filter out messages that are not meant for them.

Unfortunately, we cannot hide the identity without resorting to cryptography. If we wish to avoid the expense of cryptography, then we must assume that the identity can be exposed to an adversary. The adversary can use this identity to obtain illegal access in a location-based access control system, using a form of run internal replay attack [\cite=syverson:csfw1994]. More concretely, the adversary can impersonate the prover as follows:

The verifier confirms the location claim of the prover. The adversary obtains the identity of the prover by eavesdropping on the communications between the verifier and the prover.

The adversary sends an access request to the verifier, with the identity of the prover attached to the request.

The verifier confirms that the entity who sent the access request is the prover, and mistakenly grants access to the adversary.

The impersonation attack takes advantage of the fact that an adversary can learn the identity of the prover from the messages exchanged during location verification, which it can then use to create a valid access request. Theorem [\ref=thm:impersonate] expresses this intuition formally.

Let i be the identity of the prover, ki a secret held by the prover, F(i,ki,m) a function which maps an arbitrary message (e.g.  an access request) to a format accepted by the verifier, and m the actual message to the access control system. An adversary can impersonate the prover when the following conditions hold:

i is exposed to the adversary during location verification.

F(i,ki,m) is efficiently computable by anyone given only i and m.

Any F(i,ki,m) sent to the verifier at any time is accepted as a valid message from the prover after location is successfully verified.

Assume that the prover with identity i has gone through location verification. The adversary learns i, which he can use to compute F(i,ki,m) for any m. Since location verification has already finished, when the adversary sends F(i,ki,m) to the verifier, it will be accepted as a valid message from the prover. In other words, the adversary has successfully sent a message which the verifier believes to be from the prover.

If we simply attach the identity along with the access request, we do not need the secret ki, and F in theorem [\ref=thm:impersonate] can be expressed as F(i,ki,m) = (i,m), which can obviously be efficiently computed by anyone who knows the identity i and a message m. With such an F, the Echo protocol satisfies the conditions in theorem [\ref=thm:impersonate], so it is vulnerable to impersonation.

If we want to prevent an adversary from forging a message, the prover must use a secret known only to itself and perhaps the verifier. Otherwise, the adversary would be able to efficiently compute F(i,ki,m), since everything required by the prover for its efficient computation would also be known to the adversary.

Also, the verifier must be able to retrieve the identity i and the actual message m when it receives F(i,ki,m). Without a previous arrangement with the prover, the verifier will have to be able to do this without knowing the secret ki.

If the verifier does not possess the secret ki, and m cannot be efficiently computed from only F(i,ki,m) alone, i.e.  without using the identity i, then we require public key cryptography, or something at least as computationally expensive, as is implied by theorem [\ref=thm:public-transform]. Even if the verifier and the prover prearrange to share the secret ki, we will still require symmetric key cryptography or its equivalent, as is implied by theorem [\ref=thm:secret-transform].

Let function F satisfy the following conditions:

F(i,ki,m) can be computed efficiently given only i, m, and a secret ki.

F(i,ki,m) cannot be computed efficiently given only i and m.

m can be computed efficiently given only i and F(i,ki,m).

m cannot computed efficiently given only F(i,ki,m).

The function F can be used to create a public key cipher of equivalent computational cost and strength.

Define G(i,F(i,ki,m)) = m. By assumption, G can be computed efficiently. We can create a public key cipher P by defining the encryption function as E((i,ki),m) = F(i,ki,m) and the decryption function as D(i,c) = G(i,c), where (i,ki) is the private key and i is the public key. From the given conditions:

Encryption can be done efficiently given private key (i,ki).

Encryption cannot be done efficiently without private key (i,ki), since without ki we cannot construct (i,ki)

Decryption can be done efficiently given public key i.

Decryption cannot be done efficiently without public key i.

Therefore P is indeed a public key cipher. It is easy to see that it would take the same amount of effort to break P as F, and that the computational costs are equal.

Let function F satisfy the following conditions:

F(i,ki,m) can be computed efficiently given only i, m, and a secret ki.

F(i,ki,m) cannot be computed efficiently given only i and m.

m can be computed efficiently given only i, ki, and F(i,ki,m).

m cannot be computed efficiently given only i and F(i,ki,m).

The function F can be used to create a symmetric key cipher of equivalent computational cost and strength.

The proof is nearly identical to that of theorem [\ref=thm:public-transform].

Define G(i,ki,F(i,ki,m)) = m. By assumption, G can be computed efficiently. We can create a symmetric key cipher S by defining the encryption function as E((i,ki),m) = F(i,ki,m) and the decryption function as D((i,ki),c) = G(i,ki,c), where (i,ki) is the secret key. From the given conditions:

Encryption can be done efficiently given key (i,ki).

Encryption cannot be done efficiently without key (i,ki), since without ki we cannot construct (i,ki).

Decryption can be done efficiently given key (i,ki).

Decryption cannot be done efficiently without key (i,ki), since without ki we cannot construct (i,ki).

Therefore S is indeed a symmetric key cipher. It is easy to see that it would take the same amount of effort to break S as F, and that the computational costs are equal.

If the message m can be easily retrieved from F(i,ki,m), the other requirements for F essentially require it to be a message authentication code or a digital signature scheme, depending on whether the secret ki is shared or not, respectively. Although message authentication codes can be more efficiently than symmetric cryptography [\cite=l:kaliski:cryptobytes1995], digital signature schemes typically require primitives from public key cryptosystems [\cite=l:bellare:eurocrypt1996] [\cite=l:NIST1994]

We can conclude that an adversary can impersonate the prover after location verification is done using the Echo protocol, if we do not allow the use of public key cryptography when there is no previous setup between provers and verifiers.

Defenses

In this section we suggest a couple of approaches which can be used to defeat impersonation attacks. They are based on avoiding the conditions listed in theorem [\ref=thm:impersonate]. As in [\cite=sastry:wise2003], we assume the verifier to be trustworthy.

Cryptography

The simplest way to prevent an impersonation attack is to just bear the cost of cryptography. Encrypting messages sent between the prover and the verifier after location verification finishes ensures that an adversary would not be able to send a valid forged message to the verifier.

By pre-sharing a secret key between the prover and the verifier, they can prevent adversaries from sending forged messages using symmetric cryptography. We do not even need to use the keyed variant of the Echo protocol. The verifier can use a table to look up the secret key associated with a given identity. An adversary would not be able to create a valid forged message since it would not be able to get the secret key from the identity.

We could also avoid the need for prearrangements between the prover and verifier by using public key cryptography. We could actually use the public key of the prover as the identity. Using the Echo protocol, the verifier can confirm that the public key belongs to a prover that is located within its region of acceptance. The adversary cannot learn the private key, so it would not be able to send a forged message that is seemingly sent by the prover.

One thing to note is that we must take care to ensure that encrypted messages sent between the prover and the verifier cannot be used in a replay attack. This can be done using a challenge response protocol, taking advantage of the secret or public key known by the verifier. The design of such a protocol to resist replay attacks [\cite=gong:csfw1993] [\cite=aura:csfw1997] [\cite=abadi:tse1996] is beyond the scope of this paper.

One-way Echo protocol

While using cryptography is a simple solution to preventing impersonation attacks, it is also an expensive one which negates one of the important advantages of the Echo protocol, which is its frugal use of resources. Fortunately, we can modify the Echo protocol so that it is resistant to impersonation attacks without having to use cryptography.

The modification is very simple. Instead of sending the message after location verification, the prover sends the message when it first initiates location verification. By doing so, we circumvent the third condition in theorem [\ref=thm:impersonate], which requires that any message sent after location verification finishes is accepted as valid. The modified protocol, which we will call the one-way variant of the Echo protocol, is described in figure [\ref=fig:oneway-echo]. We note that the identity of the prover which is implicitly included in each message during location verification is no longer required for location-based access control, although it is still useful for filtering out irrelevant messages sent by unrelated provers and verifiers.

Since the message is sent immediately before location verification occurs, an adversary would not be able to send a forged message that would be accepted by the verifier, simply because it would not be able to predict when the prover would attempt location verification. Of course, the prover must avoid sending messages at precisely predictable times, since an adversary could send a precisely timed message with a very strong signal which "overwrites" the message sent by the prover.

The one-way variant of the protocol has some limitations. The most important one is that location verification must be done for every message. If there is a significant time interval between the sending of a message and the start of location verification, an adversary can send its own message during that time interval. Without using cryptography, the verifier would have no way of knowing that it is not from the prover. Since we would expect significant time gaps between multiple messages, we would not be able to do location verification once and expect the result to be valid for all of them.

Another limitation is that it is not useful for location-based access control of information. In order to retrieve information, the verifier would have to send it to the prover. If we send the information in the clear, then the signal can be detected from outside the verifier's region of acceptance, making access control pointless. If we encrypt the information and send the ciphertext, then the modification is unnecessary since we could have simply used the original Echo protocol.

However, the one-way Echo protocol is useful for sending messages to the verifier without requiring a reply. Such messages are well suited to specifying actions on physical objects at the location, e.g.  turning on lights or lowering the volume of a speaker. We only care that the messages come from certain locations in such situations, and we are not interested in concealing information, so there is no need for cryptography. The prover can send a single message one-way to the verifier using the modified protocol, which is why we suggest calling it the one-way Echo protocol.

Messages sent with the one-way Echo protocol need to be short. If a message is too long, an adversary will have enough time to notice the transmission and overwrite later parts of the message with a strong enough signal. This limitation can be overcome by sending a command to accept a message with a given hash during location verification. The actual message would be sent separately, which the verifier would check against the hash.

Despite these limitations, the one-way Echo protocol is an inexpensive way to verify location claims, and is resistant to impersonation attacks. Like the original Echo protocol, the protocol itself does not require cryptography nor prearranged setup between provers and verifiers. Unlike the original protocol, messages such as access requests need not be encrypted, since message transmission is integrated into the protocol itself without opening the protocol to impersonation attacks.

Conclusions

Location verification, which verifies location claims made by provers, can be done using the Echo protocol. The protocol is able to guarantee that a prover whose location claim is verified is indeed within the region it claims to be. It is able to do this without requiring expensive operations such as cryptography or time synchronization, nor does it require previous arrangements between provers and verifiers.

Unfortunately, we cannot securely take advantage of a verification result without using cryptography. We have shown that this is because the Echo protocol has the following properties. First, it does not hide the identity of the prover. Second, an adversary can forge a message that can appear to be from the prover. Finally, a valid message can be received at any time by the verifier. In fact, any location verification protocol with these properties will be vulnerable to impersonation attacks.

A simple way to defend against impersonation attacks is to lift the restriction against using cryptography. We suggest a one-way variant of the Echo protocol as an alternative. Although it is limited to sending short messages to the verifier when no reply is expected, it is resistant against impersonation attacks, while still maintaining the low resource requirements and spontaneity of the original Echo protocol.