Mutual Transits by Extrasolar Planet-Companion

Effects of Mutual Transits by Extrasolar Planet-Companion Systems on Light Curves

Introduction

It is of general interest to discover a second Earth-Moon system. Detections of extrasolar planet-satellite or binary planet systems will bring important information to planet (and satellite) formation theory (e.g., Jewitt and Sheppard 2005, Canup and Ward 2006, Jewitt and Haghighipour 2007).

It is not clear whether the IAU definition for planets in the solar system can be applied to extrasolar planets as it is. The IAU definition in 2006 is as follows. A planet is a celestial body that (a) is in orbit around the Sun, (b) has sufficient mass so that it assumes a hydrostatic equilibrium (nearly round) shape, and (c) has cleared the neighborhood around its orbit.

We call a gravitationally bound system of two extrasolar planet-size objects simply as extrasolar binary planets. They constitute a true binary if the following conditions are satisfied instead of (c) in addition to the two criteria (a) with replacing the Sun by a host star and (b). (c1) Their total mass is dominant in the neighborhood around their orbits. (c2) Their common center of mass is above their surfaces. If it is below a surface of one object, one may call them an extrasolar planet-satellite.

There have been theoretical works on the existence of planets with satellites. The solar system's outer gaseous planets have multiple satellites, each of which notably has a similar fraction (~  10- 4) of their respective planet's mass. For instance, Canup and Ward (2006) found that the mass fraction is regulated to ~  10- 4 by a balance between two competing processes of the material inflow to the satellites and the satellite loss through orbital decay driven by the gas. They suggested that similar processes could limit the largest satellite of extrasolar giant planets. Such theoretical predictions await future observational tests. There still remains a possibility of detecting Jupiter-size binary planets with comparable masses. Furthermore, we should note that their model does not hold for solid planets. It may be possible to detect binary solid planets (perhaps Earth-size ones). Therefore, future detection of extrasolar planet-companion systems or a larger mass fraction (>  10- 4) of satellites around gaseous exoplanets will give definite information on the planet and satellite formation theory. In any case, unexpected findings will open the possibility of new configurations such as binary planets.

Recent direct imaging of a planetary mass ~  8MJ with an apparent separation of 330 AU from the parent star (Lafrenière et al. 2008) indicates the likely existence of long-period exoplanets (>  1000 yr). In this paper, we consider such exoplanets as well as close ones.

Since the first detection of a transiting extrasolar planet (Charbonneau et al. 2000), photometric techniques have been successful (e.g., Deming, Seager, Richardson, Harrington 2005 for probing atmosphere, Ohta et al. 2005, Winn et al. 2005, Gaudi & Winn 2007, Narita et al. 2007, 2008 for measuring stellar spins). In addition to COROT, Kepler has been very recently launched. It will monitor about 105 stars with expected 10 ppm (= 10- 5) photometric differential sensitivity. This enables the detection of a Moon-size object.

Sartoretti and Schneider (1999) first suggested a photometric detection of extrasolar satellites. Cabrera and Schneider (2007) developed a method based on the imaging of a planet-companion as an unresolved system (but resolved from its host star) by using planet-companion mutual transits and mutual shadows. As an alternative method, timing offsets for a single eclipse have been investigated for eclipsing binary stars as a perturbation of transiting planets around the center of mass in the presence of the third body (Deeg et al. 1998, 2000, Doyle et al. 2000). It has been recently extended toward detecting "exomoons" (Szabó, Szatmáry, Divéki, Simon 2006, Simon, Szatmáry, Szabó, 2007, Kipping 2009a, 2009b). The purpose of the present paper is to investigate effects of mutual transits by extrasolar planet-companion systems on light curves, especially how the effects depend on their spin velocity relative to their orbital one around their parent star. Furthermore, we shall discuss extrasolar mutual transits as a complementary method of measuring the system's parameters such as a planet-companion's separation and thereby of identifying them as a true binary, planet-satellite system or others.

Our treatment is applicable both to a true binary and to a planet-satellite system. Our method has analogies in classical ones for eclipsing binaries (e.g., Binnendijk 1960, Aitken 1964). A major difference is that occultation of one faint object by the other transiting a parent star causes an apparent increase in light curves, whereas eclipsing binaries make a decrease. What is more important is that, in both cases where one faint object transits the other and vice versa, changes are made in the light curves due to mutual transits even if no light emissions come from the faint objects. In a single transit, on the other hand, thermal emissions from a transiting object at lower temperature make a difference in light curves during the secondary eclipse, when the object moves behind a parent star as observed for instance for HD209458b (Deming et al. 2005).

Let us briefly mention transits/occultations in the solar system. It is possible that the Moon or another celestial body occult multiple celestial bodies at the same time. Such mutual occultations are extremely rare and can be seen only from a small part of the world. The last event was on 23rd of April, 1998, when the Moon occulted the Venus and Jupiter simultaneously for observers on Ascension Island. Such an event is extremely rare because it is controlled by three different orbital periods of the Moon, Venus and Jupiter and hence the probability of the alignment of the three objects is very low.

In the case of planet-companion systems, on the other hand, orbital periods around a host star are common for the two objects. Therefore, the number of time scales controling extrasolar mutual transits are two; the orbital period around the host star and the planet-companion's spin period. As a result, extrasolar mutual transits (with one planet occasionally transiting or occulting the other) across a parent star, can occur more frequently than mutual occultations in our solar system.

This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we consider mutual transits of extrasolar planet-companion systems in orbit around their host star. Event rates and possible bounds are also discussed. Section 3 is devoted to the conclusion.

Mutual Transits of Extrasolar Planet-companion Systems

Approximations and notation

For simplicity, we assume that the orbital plane of a planet-companion system orbiting around its common center of mass (COM) is the same as that of the COM in orbit around the host star with radius R. This co-planar assumption is reasonable because it seems that planets are born from fragmentations of a single proto-stellar disk and thus their spins and orbital angular momentum are nearly parallel to the spin axis of the disk.

Inclination angles of the orbital plane with respect to our line of sight are chosen as 90 degrees, because transiting planets can be observed only for (nearly) the edge-on case. In order to show clearly our idea, the binaries are in circular motion as an approximation by (c1). It is straightforward to extend to elliptic motions.

For investigating transits, we need the transverse position x and velocity v. We denote those of the COM for planet-companion systems as xCM and vCM, respectively, where the origin of x is chosen as the center of the star. The position and velocity of each planet with mass m1 and m2 in the binary system with separation a are denoted as xi and vi (i = 1,2), respectively. We express the position of each planet as

[formula]

where the orbital radius of each planet around their COM is denoted by ai, the angular velocity of the binary motion is denoted by ω, and t0 means the time when the binary separation becomes perpendicular to our line of sight (See Table 1 for a list of parameters and their definition). For simplicity, we shall set t0  =  0 below.

One can approximate vCM as being constant during the transit, because the duration is much shorter than the orbital period for the binary around the host star.

Transits in light curves

The decrease in the apparent luminosity due to mutual transits is expressed as

[formula]

where S = πR2, S1  =  πr21, S2  =  πr22, ΔS = S1 + S2 - S12. Here, r1 and r2 denote the radii of the planets 1 and 2, and S12 denotes the area of the apparent overlap between them, which is seen from the observer. Without loss of generality, we assume r1  ≥  r2.

Effects on light curves

We investigate light curves by mutual transits due to planet-companion systems. The time derivative of Eq. ([formula]) becomes v2  =  vCM  +  a2ω sin ω(t - t0) . Hence, the apparent retrograde motion is observed if vCM  <  a2ω, which we call the fast planet-companion's spin. If vCM  >  a2ω, we call it slow spin. The Earth-Moon and Jupiter-Ganymede systems represent slow and marginal cases, respectively.

Figure [formula] shows light curves by mutual transits for two cases. One is the zero spin limit of ω  →  0 as a reference. In this case, motion of the two objects is nothing but a translation. Because of the time lag between the first and second transits, a certain plateau appears in light curves. The other is a slow spin case as W = 1, where W denotes the dimensionless spin ratio defined as aω / vCM. Its basic feature is the same as that for zero spin case, except for certain changes that are due to the relative motion between the planets. In the slow case, averaged inclination of each slope in the light curve is dependent on time, especially at the start and end of the mutual transit. Here we assume planet-companion systems with a common mass density, a radius ratio as R:r1:r2 = 20:2:1, and a / R = 0.9.

Fast spin cases are shown by Figs. [formula] and [formula] (W = 3 and 6, respectively), where the apparent retrograde motion produces characteristic fluctuations. Here we assume the same configuration as that in Fig. [formula] except for shorter distance from the host star. These figures show also the transverse positions of planets with time, which would help us to understand the chronological changes in the light curves. In particular, it can be understood that such characteristic patterns appear only when two faint objects are in front of the star and one of them transits (or occults) the other.

Parameter determinations through mutual transits

In all the above cases, the amount of decrease in light curves or the magnitude of fluctuations gives the ratios among the radii of the star and two faint objects (R,r1,r2). Through behaviors of apparent light curves in both slow and fast cases, aω (as its ratio to vCM) can be obtained as shown by Figs. [formula]-[formula]. Here, vCM is determined as vCM  =  2R / TE by measuring the duration of the whole transit time TE because of R  ≫  r1,r2, if the stellar radius R (and mass mS) are known for instance by its spectral type. Therefore, aω is determined separately. The planet-companion's spin velocity aω determines the gravity between the objects.

The spin period P (and thus ω) can be determined, especially for the fast rotation case that produces multiple "hills", because an interval between neighboring "hills" is nothing but a half of the binary period. As a result, the binary separation a is obtained separately. Hence one can determine the total mass of the binary as Gmtot  =  ω2a3 from Kepler's third law, where G denotes the gravitational constant.

If we assume also that the mass density is common for two objects constituting the binary (this may be reasonable especially for similar size objects as r1  ~  r2), each mass is determined as m1  =  r31(r31  +  r32)- 1mtot and m2  =  r32(r31  +  r32)- 1mtot, respectively. Therefore, the orbital radius of each body around the COM is obtained as a1  =  r32(r31  +  r32)- 1a and a2  =  r31(r31  +  r32)- 1a, respectively. At this point, importantly, the two objects can be identified as a true binary or planet-satellite system.

In a slow spin case, on the other hand, the apparent separation [formula] (normal to our line of sight) is determined as [formula] from measuring the time lag T12 between the first and second transits because vCM is known above.

Before closing this subsection, we briefly mention the time scale of the brightness fluctuation. The full width of a "hill" Thill corresponds to the crossing time of two planets as 2r / aω. We thus obtain

[formula]

By measuring the width, therefore, aω can be determined directly and independently only for the fast spin case that produces spiky patterns. To be more precise, the full width of a "hill" at top and bottom are expressed as (See also Figure [formula])

[formula]

Only for symmetric binaries (r1 = r2), we have Ttop = 0 and thus true spikes. Otherwise, truncated spikes (or "hills") appear. With r1 and r2 determined from brightness changes, measuring either Ttop or Tbottom provides aω. This can be verified in Figure [formula]. Figure [formula] shows a flow chart of the parameter determinations that are discussed above.

The half width for giant planets is about

[formula]

Therefore, detections of such fluctuations due to mutual transits of extrasolar binary planets require frequent observations, say every hour. Furthermore, more frequency (e.g., every ten minutes) is necessary for parameter estimations of the binary.

Let us mention a connection of the present result with current space telescopes. Decrease in apparent luminosity due to the secondary planet is O(r22 / R2). Besides the time resolution (or observation frequency) and mission lifetimes, detection limits by COROT with the achieved accuracy of photometric measurements (700 ppm in one hour) could put r2 / R  ~  2  ×  10- 2. The nominal integration time is 32 sec. but co-added over 8.5 min. except for 1000 selected targets for which the nominal sampling is preserved. By the Kepler mission with expected 10 ppm differential sensitivity for solar-like stars with mV = 12, the lower limit will be reduced to r2 / R  ~  3  ×  10- 3. An analogy of the Earth-Moon (r2 / R  ~  2.5  ×  10- 3, W  ~  0.03) and Jupiter-Ganymede (r2 / R  ~  4  ×  10- 3, W  ~  0.8) will be marginally detectable. Figure [formula] shows a light curve due to an analogy of the Earth-Moon system. Observations both with high frequency (at least during the time of transits) and with good photometric sensitivity are desired for future detections of mutual transits. COROT satisfies these requirements and thus has a chance to find mutual transits. Kepler (with CCDs readout every three seconds) is one of the most suitable missions to date for the goal.

Event rate and possible bounds on Earth-Moon-like systems

The probability of detecting mutual transits is expressed as p = p1p2p3, where the probability for an object (with orbital period PCM) transiting its host star during the observed time Tobs is denoted as p1  =  Tobs / PCM, that for one component transiting (or occulting) the other during the eclipse with duration TE is denoted as p2  =  TE / P for slow cases (p2  =  1 for P  <  TE), and that for a condition that an observer is located in directions where the eclipse can be seen is denoted as p3  =  θmax / (π / 2). Here, the maximum angle from the orbital plane becomes [formula]. Hence we obtain

[formula]

which becomes p  ~  6  ×  10- 5Tobs- 1 for an Earth-Moon-like system. We thus need to monitor a number of stars (NS  >  104). Let f denote the fraction of such systems for an averaged star. We have the expected events n for observing NS stars during Tobs as n = fpNS. Therefore, monitoring 105 stars for three years with Kepler may lead to the discovery of a second Earth-Moon-like system if the fraction is larger than 0.05, or it may put upper limits on the fraction as f  <  (pNS)- 1  ~  0.05(3 / Tobs)(105 / NS).

We should note that there exist constraints due to some physical mechanisms on our parameters, especially the orbital separation. For instance, the companion's orbital radius must be larger than the Roche limit and smaller than the Hill radius (e.g., Danby 1988, Murray and Dermott 2000). These stability conditions are satisfied by the Earth-Moon system. Therefore, we can use Eq. ([formula]) for Earth-Moon analogies. For general cases such as "exoearth-exomoon" systems that have much smaller separations or are located at much shorter distance from their parent star, however, we have to take account of corrections due to certain physical constraints (e.g., Sartoretti and Schneider 1999 for estimates of such conditional probabilities with incorporating the Roche and Hill radii).

Conclusion

We have shown that light curves by mutual transits of extrasolar planets depend strongly on a planet-companion's spin velocity, and especially for small separation cases where occultation of one faint object by the other transiting a parent star causes an apparent increase in light curves and characteristic fluctuations appear. We have shown also that extrasolar mutual transits provide a complementary method for measuring the radii of two transiting objects, their separation and mass, and consequently for identifying them as a true binary, planet-satellite system or others. Event rates and possible bounds on the fraction of Earth-Moon-like systems have been presented. Up to this point, we have considered only the obscuration effect in a simplistic manner. When actual light curves are analyzed, we should incorporate (1) a small deviation of the inclination angle from 90 degrees, (2) elliptical motions of the binary and (3) perturbations as three (or more)-body interactions (e.g., Danby 1988, Murray and Dermott 2000). Limb darkenings also should be taken into account.