Simplicissimus' Inquiries

, ,

This is a kind of essay dedicated to Lev Borisovich Okun.

I would like to ask some questions which I can't answer. However I suspect I know how to answer them. Questions are as follows:

Particle identity.

Information storage.

Information read-out at the speed higher than that of light.

Particle Identity

Somehow all interactions of particles obey the same laws in Universe both at Alfa-Centauri and everywhere, and even in INR.

This is surprising and even mysterious.

Electrons are identical everywhere.

What is the reason of this phenomena?

Any replication might have mistakes with some probability. We guess it should be about 10- 40 . This might arise because of a small violation of the Pauli principle.

In genetics we know the examples of identities - children are similar to their parents, because they are copies of the parents on the cell level. Why the electrons are identical to each other? Because they are copies of their parents.

Information Storage

All interactions are always and everywhere identical. Why is it so? If we want to store any information it should be saved somewhere in discrete structures, because information can't be saved on a continuous set. We have to mention here the cellular automata.

Information should be stored somewhere.

Where? In electron or in medium.

Certainly, it is obvious that an electron is unable to store the information. Then the only choice is medium. As a store room is medium we estimate the number of cells as 1080.

In case electrons do contain this information, I will address the same questions to their components. And so on.

Vacuum is the only medium capable to store the necessary information.

Speed Higher than that of Light

A photon has regular behavior. Photons time of flight through the target is about 10- 13 sec. It is hard to imagine that a particle might get any information during this period of time - what it is and how should it behave.

So the speed of communication should be certainly greater than the speed of motion. Consequently particles should read out the information at the speed higher than that of light.

Acknowledgements

I am very much obliged to S.A. Demidov, A.U. Ignatyev, V.A. Matveev, V.A. Rubakov, A.N. Tavkchelidze, I.I. Tkachev for useful discussions and support.