scaled scaled scaled = = =

Included-row exchange principle for quantum minors

Bialgebra Mq(n) ('the quantum linear semigroup') and its Hopf quotients SLq(n),GLq(n) and their multiparametric analogues have been studied in a number of references with diverse motivation. Identities among the quantum minors in those algebras were important in numerous calculations, often with representation-theoretic and geometric motivation. Though more complicated identities will still appear, the subject is considered matured in a sense: if we consider only homogeneous order two (counting minors involved) relations and impose certain natural ordering on the minors, in a sense all such "commutation" relations are known. The situation is more complicated with higher order relations and when the order of labels in identities is nonstandard.

In geometrical study of the algebras above, quantum Gauss decomposition plays a major role. Unlike in the classical case, the shifts of the big Bruhat cell are not mutually isomorphic (as algebras). Depending on formalism, the permutation of rows or columns in the Gauss decomposition problem forces different relations among the generators of the solutions. However, some among the related identities surprisingly stay the same, although the commutation relations and hence the proofs of the relations change significantly after the ordering among the rows changes.

In this paper we prove a principle for generalizing certain identities, where a position of a row of exactly one of the entries involved in each monomial changes, without changing the shape of the identity, including the exact coefficients. We call this the included-row exchange principle for identities involving quantum minors because the position of the exchanged rows is included in all other minors appearing in the identity.

Let K, L be some linearly ordered sets of positive cardinality. The elements of K and L will be called labels. The generators of associative unital algebra Mq(K,L) over a base field [formula] are tkl where k∈K, l∈L, [formula] and the relations are

[formula]

where θ(true)  =  1, θ(false)  =  0, and

[formula]