Comments on "Microscale flow visualization"

=6mm Sinton just presented a rather interesting and comprehensive review about the microscale flow visualization (Sinton, 2004) due to advances in microfluidic and nanofluidic technologies (Li, 2004) being paralleled by advances in methods for direct optical measurement of transport phenomena on these scales. As Sinton noticed, a variety of methods for microscale flow visualization have appeared and evolved since the late 1990s. These methods and their applications to date are reviewed therein (Sinton, 2004) in detail, and in context of the both the fundamental phenomena they exploit and the fundamental phenomena they are applied to measure. Where possible, links to macroflow visualization methods are established, and the physical mechanisms underlying these methods are explained. We all know that direct flow visualization is of key importance for the fundamental understanding of microflows, analyzing, developing and evaluating novel microfluidic processes, investigating non-ideal behavior such as spatial and temporal gradients in surface and fluid properties, and providing benchmark data for computational investigations (Sinton and Li, 2004). There are, however, some differences between macro- and microdomain which will influence the results based on particle-based, scalar-based and point-detection scanning microfluidic flow visualization methods. One specific example is the roughness of the bounded wall, which is quite significant in common microchannels but could be ad hoc neglected in macrochannels (Chu, 2000/2002). For microfabricated Si-based walls, the roughness cannot be eliminated completely and thus induce quite random scattering effects (e.g., for the particle image velocimetry (PIV), the motion of the bulk fluid is inferred from the observed velocity of marker particles, Adrian 1991) especially for the particle-based flow visualization methods. As claimed before (Santiago et al., 1998), the stochastic influence of the Brownian motion of the small particles was significant, however, ensemble averaging over several images was shown to greatly improve the obtained velocity field. It is clear that the near-wall flow field would have poor resolution due to the irregular scattering coming from the random roughness along the wall or the confined boundary (Chu, 2000/2002). How about the scalar-based flow velocimetry, where the motion of the bulk fluid is inferred from the observed velocity of a conserved scalar? What is the roughness effect in microchannels for the scattering of light emitting molecules (fluorescent or phosphorescent) which are typically employed to increase the signal from relatively small volumes of fluid (for this same reason fluorescently labeled particles are employed in particle-based visualization of microflows). One example is, analysis methods for obtaining velocity data from the observed transport of a conserved scalar which are collectively termed scalar image velocimetry (SIV). The base mechanisms employed in these scalar-based flow velocimetry techniques are, fluorescence, photobleached fluorescence, photochromic reaction, phosphorescence, caged fluorescence, and IR heating. The essential near-wall flow field will be poorly resolved once the microchannel geometry is narrowed down compared to the intrinsic random roughness produced by the current microfabrication technology (Dwivedi, 2000; Komvopoulos, 1996). The situations will be worse considering the gaseous flow visualization in microchannels (as noted before, owing to challenges associated with seeding and particle inertia, micro-PIV has not been successfully applied to gaseous microflows to date; Wereley and Meinhart, 2004). As commented by Sinton (2004) : it is expected, however, that these distinctions will become progressively blurred as more new and hybrid techniques are developed. Particularly as marker sizes are reduced to the limit of a single molecule, scalar and particle distinctions are no longer meaningful. The majority of efforts in this area have involved liquid flows, however, recent developments toward gaseous microflow visualization were also discussed. Selection of an appropriate microscale visualization method depends chiefly on the phenomena and application of interest. Micro-PIV is the most well-developed microscale flow visualization method. The ability to acquire high spatial/temporal resolution velocity field data in multidimensional microflows has driven this development. Although micro-PIV technology has matured rapidly and commercial systems have been available for some time, significant improvements continue to appear in the literature. A variety of scalar-based methods for microscale flow visualization have been developed and applied to study microflows (the most well-developed of which is caged-fluorescence imaging). Although physical flow-tagging mechanisms vary, scalar- based methods typically involve tracking a crossstream flow marker and thus are most suitably applied to unidirectional microchannel flows. One advantage of scalar-based methods is that the nature of the velocity field may be interpreted readily from the image data. Thus, scalar-based methods are particularly applicable when species transport is of interest, a common focus in microfluidic chip applications. Point-detection scanning based microflow visualization methods have shown promise with respect to spatial resolution, and optical sectioning capability. Temporal resolution is typically limited by the scanning rate, however, significant improvements have been made in this regard recently. Most of the microscale flow visualization methods discussed have evolved from methods developed originally for macroscale flows. It is unlikely, however, that developed microscale flow visualization methods will be translated to nanoscale flows in a similar manner. Resolving nanoscale features with visible light presents a fundamental challenge. Although point-detection scanning methods have potential to increase the flow measurement resolution on the microscale, spatial resolution is ultimately limited by the optical probe volume (length scale on the order of 100 nm), which, in turn, is limited by the wavelength of light employed. In that context, optical-based spatially resolved flow measurements in nanochannels are, at best, difficult to visualize. Both the future refinement of microscale flow visualization methods and the development of direct flow measurement methods for nanoflows will be followed with great interest. The present author believes that the limitation of the current micro- and nanofabrication technology : how to smooth out the random roughness along the wall or the confined boundary (Zubel and Kramkowska, 2001) will also produce challenges to the researchers working on the point-detection scanning techniques for microflows and/or nanoflows (Li, 2004).