Electrons re-acceleration at the footpoints of Solar Flares

Introduction

Our image of the chromosphere has evolved in the last few decades from a simple stationary structured layer to a highly dynamic one which hosts a very complex magnetic field structure. Hinode's high resolution observations surprised us with an image of the chromosphere that is even more complex than predicted (e.g. Liu et al. 2009) and revived the debate about the relationship between chromospheric activities and the corona. This is particularly important In the context of the relationship between the chromospheric footpoints of a flaring loop and its coronal part, particularly during the hight of flares which are accompanied by strong HXR radiation at the footpoints. The standard model of solar flares view the footpoints as a thick region where particles accelerated at the corona lose their energy due to collisions and radiate HXR. The relationship between the population of accelerated particles and the HXR at the footpoints is given by the Thick Target Model (Brown 71, Hudson 72) As with other 'Standard Models', steady improvements in relevant data are necessary. Here we recap the TTM in its basic form with injection from the corona, indicate some of the issues facing this, and discuss an alternative type of scenario in which the acceleration and radiation ('target') regions are not distinct.

Assumptions and Problems of the TTM

One of the main assumptions of Thick Target Model which we question here is the strict separation between the acceleration and the radiation regions. Breaking this assumption and allowing particles to gain energy in the radiation region solves may of the challenges which TTM faces as discussed bellow. In the TTM fast electrons are assumed to be accelerated (so the net energy change rate [formula]) by a usually unspecified process in a tenuous coronal region A and injected continuously into a cool dense target chromosphere radiation region R where their energies are assumed to be controlled mainly by collisional losses (so that [formula]) accompanied by HXR bremsstrahlung radiation. Radiation in A is assumed to be small at high energies ≥   20 keV (except for unusually dense loops - Veronig and Brown 2004). In reality, non-collisional [formula] due to return current Ohmic dissipation is important for the more intense events (Brown and Bingham 1984) while some redistribution of E by wave-particle interactions is inevitable since dispersive propagation ( Melni'k et al. 1999, Kontar 2001) and even collisions alone create electron distributions with f'(v) > 0 (Haydock et al. 2001). Even in the purely collisional case of TTM injection, observed HXR fluxes place strong requirements on electron beam density and power supply. First, in any cool HXR source, long range Coulomb energy losses from fast electrons greatly exceed (≃105  ~    ×  ) the HXR power radiated in close collisions, so the electron power supply needed is ≃105  ~    ×   the HXR luminosity. Second, since the electrons in R are decelerated monotonically hence 'lost', they have to be continuously replenished by injection from A at a high rate F1s- 1 above E = E1. In a large HXR event F1  ≫  1036s- 1 for E1 = 20 keV (Hoyng et al. 1976) which, for event duration [formula]s, means a total N  ≫  1039 electrons processed. This exceeds the total electrons in a large dense coronal loop (1027cm3  ×  1011cm- 3), a fact often termed the Electron Number Problem though the solution to this was established long ago (Hoyng et al.1976, Knight and Sturrock 1977, Colgate 1978). Beam electrodynamic theory shows that the E-field created by beam injection drives a return current in the plasma which delivers electrons back to the corona at rate F1, though there are issues over how the currents close at A (Benka and Holman 1994). However, there is a real problem with the instantaneous local beam density if it has as small a cross sectional area A as the recent estimates of the impulsive WLF, optical and UK kernel sizes, < 3'' (Hudson, Metcalf and Wolfson 2006) or A < 1016cm2. Since F1≃An1v1  ≈  1036A16n10s- 1 where A16 = 10- 16A,n10 = 10- 10n and v1≃1010cms- 1, large event values of F1  ≫  1036 imply a local instantaneous (not time integrated)beam density above E1 = 20 keV of at least n1 > 1010cm- 3. If the beam is accelerated and propagates in the corona, this is highly implausible as it equals (or exceeds) the total plasma density in all but the densest loops ever seen (Veronig and Brown 2004). If the 'beam' footpoints are not monolithic but comprise a moving filament of even smaller instantaneous area (Fletcher et al. 2004) then the density problem would be even worse, even though such morphology seems more consistent with the values and evolution of soft X-ray emission measure and temperature (Stoiser, Brown and Veronig 2008). Note, however, that this density problem of the TTM only arises in the case of injection from the tenuous corona into the chromsophere. It is not an issue for thick target HXR production by a beam accelerated and propagating wholly in dense layers

A second challenge to the TTM from recent data concerns the beam anisotropy. Electrons descending a loop produce HXR bremsstrahlung which is quite strongly beamed downwards (e.g. Brown 1972) unless they are near to isotropic when injected. Kontar and Brown (2006) recently emphasized (cf. Langer and Petrosian 1987) that, because of the large HXR albedo of the photosphere, such beaming should result in a HXR spectral 'bump' signature of the albedo around the 30-60 keV range. Such a feature is observed but only at the level expected for a near isotropic primary HXR source. Quantitative inference of beam anisotropy from HXR spectra, both on a few individual events (Kontar and Brown 2006) using the photosphere as a 'mirror', and statistically (Kasparova, Kontar and Brown 2007) points to near isotropy of the electrons in the HXR source. It should be noted, however, that their methods measure anisotropy with very low angular resolution - essentially in one upward and one downward direction - and could be consistent with many distributions having nearly equal up and down fluxes, though this is far from the usual TTM assumption. Another result which, if confirmed, would indicate small anisotropy of fast electrons is the reported absence of detectable polarization in impulsive Hα kernels (Bianda et al. 2005) though this has been refuted by Henoux (personal communication). A nearly isotropic electron distribution does not of itself preclude the general TTM type of scenario but fast precipitation of such electrons in any realistic field requires some non-collisional transport process - e.g. electron cyclotron masering (Melrose and Dulk 1982) to defeat the effects of magnetic trapping and so allow fast electron precipitation. The difference between interplanetary and HXR source electron spectral indices has also been shown to be is inconsistent with the CTTM scenario (Krucker et al. 2007, 2009).

Local Re-acceleration Thick Target Model and Re-acceleration mechanisms

In the light of these problems with the TTM, we have considered alternatives (Brown et al. 2009) to the injection scenario where electrons are injected as in the TTM but constantly reaccelerated locally inside a dense HXR source. In these Local re-acceleration thick target models - LRTTM the fractional density, and possibly the anisotropy, of the fast electrons are reduced compared to TTM models involving purely collisional transport after injection from the corona. The reason is basically that the photon yield ζ from one electron during its lifetime is roughly npvQτ where Q is the relevant bremsstrahlung cross section for the energy range considered and τ is the electron lifetime. More precisely it is [formula] which, for each time segment Δt of monotonic E(t), can be written [formula]. Re-acceleration can reduce [formula] below the collisional energy loss rate [formula] and/or increase E and hence τ hence ζ to ≫  ζCTTM. This reduces the F1 required to yield a specified HXR event flux. Many of the acceleration mechanisms which work in the corona could be a candidate for particle acceleration in the chromosphere. Most of these mechanisms rely on a generated electric field to transfer energy to the particle. With the chromosphere being so dynamic, the presence of such electric field is almost inevitable [\citep=judge06], the question is whether it is strong enough to be able to accelerate particles. The electric field needed to accelerate a particle from its thermal energy is the Driecer field, but if the particle already possesses energy above thermal then the field needed to accelerate the particle drops as 1 / v2. This means that mush a smaller electric field is needed to give energy to particles arriving from the corona with an initial kick in energy. This is why the case of re-acceleration in the chromosphere is stronger than the acceleration (which is not ruled out here). Examples of mechanisms which generate electric field that could re-accelerate electrons are the currents resulting from the interaction between the emerging flux and the preexisting magnetic field [\citep=tor09], electric currents generated by Alfvén waves [\citep=gu08], and currents from reconnection events [\citep=tor09]. Also, density gradience has been shown to be responsible of generating electric field both in the corona and the chromosphere [\citep=vp06] and [\citep=vp09]. In [\cite=brown09] current sheet cascade at the chromosphere was suggested as one possible LRTTM, it is shown by 3D numerical simulations that these currents are able to reaccelerate significant percentage of electrons and subsequently increase their life time in the chromosphere and their photon yield.