Impact of inclination on quasi-periodic oscillations from spiral structures

Introduction

Quasi-periodic oscillations (QPOs) are a common feature of the power spectrum of black-hole X-ray binaries [\citep=remillard06] [\citep=done07].

They are characterized by a Lorentzian component in the power spectrum of the source, distinguished from broader noisy peaks by a condition on the coherence parameter ([formula], with many cases at Q > 10). Depending on their frequencies they are either called a high-frequency QPO (~  40 to 500 Hz) or low-frequency QPO for frequencies within approximately

[formula]

Amplitude of the modulation for a spiral model

Rather than looking at the formation of the spiral instability in a disk, we decided to focus on its consequence on the emission. Consequently, rather than taking full MHD simulations of the AEI in the different conditions we wish to explore, we decided to create a simple, analytical model that mimics the temperature profile of the AEI to test the different parameters more cleanly. Indeed, in a full fluid simulation, changing one parameter in the initial condition can have repercussions on several observable parameters and, therefore, it is harder to study the different effects separately. We consider a geometrically thin accretion disk, introduce a spiral feature in this disk at a higher temperature, and consider the emission of blackbody radiation.

We have therefore taken a simple, analytic model of a disk that features a spiral structure, which is able to reproduce the main aspects of the AEI model as seen in simulations [\citep=V12], and see how the flux is thus modulated.

Parametrization of the disk temperature profile

We consider a geometrically thin disk surrounding a Schwarzschild blackhole of mass M. The disk extends from a varying inner radius [formula] to a fixed outer radius [formula].

This profile is fixed by choosing the temperature at the innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO), labeled [formula].

This equilibrium disk is assumed to give rise to a spiral instability. We model this phenomena in a very simple way, just describing the hotter spiral structure rotating in the equilibrium disk, in agreement with numerical simulations of the AEI [\citep=V12]. The temperature of the disk with this added spiral feature reads

[formula]

where the perturbation term between brackets describes the spiral pattern. The parameter γ encodes the temperature contrast between the spiral and the surrounding disk. The quantity rc is the corotation radius of the spiral. The spiral temperature is thus following a power-law decrease when moving away from r = rc, with an exponent β. This ensures that the spiral will fade away into the disk after a few turns. In the latter Gaussian term, rs is a shape function encoding the spiral feature. It ensures that the spiral's width is a factor δ times the corotation radius. The shape function reads

[formula]

where α is the spiral opening angle and Ω(rc) is the Keplerian frequency at rc. Ultimately it is the rotation frequency of the spiral and the frequency at which the flux is modulated.

Model parameters

The spiral parameters are chosen to (1) be in agreement with numerical simulations of the AEI and (2) produce reasonable values of amplitude. The present study is not devoted to the detail of the dependency of observables on the model parameters [\citep=varniere05]. Instead, we fix the parameters that represent the spiral and then study, in a frozen framework, how the inclination impacts the amplification, and this for a sample of modulation frequencies representative of the type-C LFQPO.

In this respect, the temperature at the ISCO is taken to be [formula] K, thus emitting blackbody radiation mainly around 1 keV and the disk is geometrically thin with an aspect ratio of H / r  =  0.01. The power-law exponent encoding the temperature decrease away from r = rc is set to β = 0.5. This ensures that the spiral will be negligible within a few turns. The opening angle is chosen to be α = 0.1, in agreement with numerical simulations [\citep=V11] [\citep=V12]. Then we decided to use and freeze the parameters of the spiral so that a QPO of about 10 Hz had an amplitude of at an inclination of [formula]. This gives and δ = 0.2, to the maximum reached in numerical simulations [\citep=V12]. These same parameters gave an at an inclination of [formula].

In the rest of the paper, only the inclination at which the system is observed and the position of the inner edge of the disk will be varied. This produces a large set of QPO frequencies. Indeed, as shown by [\citet=tagger99], the corotation radius of the spiral is a few times the inner radius of the disk. Here we chose to keep [formula] fixed at a typical value of 2, so that, as the inner radius varies, so the corotation radius. We consider an inner edge of the disk varying in the range

Emission from the disk and ray-tracing

The whole disk is assumed to simply emit as a blackbody at the temperature T(t,r,φ). So the specific intensity emitted at some position in the disk is

[formula]

where the superscript em refers to the emitter's frame, i.e. a frame corotating (at the local Keplerian frequency) with the disk. This emitted intensity is then transformed to the distant observer's frame using the constancy along geodesics of Iν  /  ν3. Thus

[formula]

where [formula] is the redshift factor. This redshift factor is, in particular, responsible for the so-called beaming effect, which makes the observed specific intensity stronger when the emitter travels towards the observer and fainter in the opposite case.

To compute maps of specific intensity [formula], we use the open-source general relativistic ray-tracing code GYOTO [\citep=Vin11] into which we added the parametrized disk profile that was defined in the previous section. Null geodesics are integrated in the Schwarzschild metric, backwards in time from a distant observer at some inclination with respect to the disk. Inclination is equal to the angle between the observer's line of sight and the normal to the black hole's equatorial plane. From such maps of specific intensity, the light curve (flux as a function of time) is derived by summing all pixels weighted by the element of solid angle, which is subtended by each pixel.

Figure [\ref=fig:spiral] shows, , a spiral with a corotation radius located at It shows the spiral arm fading into the background disk following the power-law decrease of the amplitude as the spiral expands. Before it reaches the end of the disk, the spiral has fully faded. Most of the emission actually comes from the first two turns of the spiral, close to r = rc, and we only consider the full spiral for consistency.

Impact of frequency and inclination on the amplitude

We can now take advantage of our analytical model and test how the amplitude of the modulation that comes from the rotating spiral behaves with respect to the position of the corotation radius, namely the frequency and the inclination of the system. While it seems easy to obtain observational data in the first case (amplitude versus νQPO), the second case (amplitude versus inclination of the system) seems less attainable. Here we need to clarify that, even this first case is not as easily compared to observation as it seems. Indeed, we are trying to look at the impact of one parameter at a time, therefore no temporal evolution is taken into account. We are not "monitoring" the evolution of the instability as the inner edge of the disk moves but, instead, looking at the same spiral in different locations, meaning all the other parameters are frozen while we take snapshots with different inner edges of the disk.

To be able to compare the different lightcurves on the same plot we renormalize them with the time being t / T where T is the period of each modulation, and the flux being [formula], where [formula] is the mean flux of each particular curve. This allows for an easier comparison of the shape of each lightcurve independantly of its total flux and period. For all models, we define the amplitude as

[formula]

where [formula] and [formula] are the extremal values of flux.

Origin of the modulation

In the case of a spiral, or any non-axisymetrical structure orbiting in the disk, one would get a modulation as a combination of two effects. First, as the spiral orbits around the disk, its observed intensity is modulated by the beaming effect: this will be stronger on the approaching side and fainter on the receding side. In addition, the projected emitting area on the observer's sky varies with time as the spiral rotates, which also creates a flux modulation. From this, it appears that the most important parameter of the spiral, as far as amplitude is concerned, is its temperature contrast with the disk (encoded in the γ parameter). The higher the contrast with the disk, the greater the amplitude of the modulation.

In Figure [\ref=fig:LC_spiral_rc] we show the renormalized lightcurves for three positions of the inner edge (and consequently of the spiral's corotation radius) for a disk seen under an inclination of [formula] (close to face-on). Several facts already appear on this plot. While all of the spirals have the same amplitude, γ, the amplitude increases as the is further away in the disk.

This can easily be understood as follows. Given the temperature profile in Eq. [\ref=eq:T], it is straightforward to obtain that the ratio between the maximum temperature along the spiral (i.e. at the corotation radius r = rc) and the temperature at the inner edge is [formula] with in our case. It is then easy to compute the corresponding ratio of blackbody emission [formula] as a function of the value of the inner radius. This ratio is a strongly increasing function of the inner radius. As a consequence, the spiral dominates more and more the inner regions of the disk as the inner radius increases. Thus, at similar spiral parameters, the amplitude increases with a receding disk. It is important to note that this is valid for similar spiral parameters and that, for widely varying spiral parameters, the amplitude behavior with respect to the inner edge of the disk could be reversed.

Another interesting point is that, at low inclination, the modulation closely resembles a sine function. It takes a Fourier decomposition to see the presence (more about this in Section [\ref=sec:pulse]). Those also become stronger similarly to the amplitude when the inner edge of the disk is further away from the ISCO.

Impact of QPO frequency on the amplitude

created by the same-parameter spirals as a function of the couple ([formula], [formula]). With the parameters we fixed, we get an approximate amplitude at a frequency of 10 Hz for the low inclination ([formula]) case.

As we can see in Fig. [\ref=fig:rms_vs_freq_incli20], we follow a wide range of frequencies and see a steady increase in the amplitude as the frequency gets lower.

Here we need to be cautious, since this plot is done for the same spiral parameters but looking at different frequencies, meaning that it does not represent an evolution of the spiral responsible for the modulation. In the case of a temporal evolution, such as the one would get in a full MHD simulation and/or a full outburst, the spiral would also change (e.g. its amplitude) hence it would influence the precise shape of this plot. Nevertheless, it shows a strong propensity of the amplitude to decrease with frequency.

Amplitude dependence on inclination

One parameter that can change a lot, both the beaming effect and the projected emitting surface (and thus, the modulation) is the inclination at which the system is observed. Using observation alone this is not something that can easily be studied. However, [\citet=motta15] show one of the first statistical studies demonstrating that higher-inclination systems tend to have a higher amplitude for the QPO than is the case for lower-inclination systems. It is therefore interesting to determine how the amplitude in an almost edge-on system (inclination [formula]) and an almost face-on system (inclination [formula]) would compare for exactly the same spiral parameters. For this reason we focus on the ratio between amplitudes at different inclinations and not their actual value.

Figure [\ref=fig:ratio_rms_incli] shows the evolution of the ratio of the amplitude at inclination [formula] over the amplitude at inclination [formula] as a function of the position of the structure in the disk, namely rc, which is related to the frequency through the mass of the central object. Indeed, as in observation, one cannot observe the same system at different inclinations, it seems easier to produce a plot that could be scaled to the of the objects. While high inclination system always have a higher amplitude than low inclination system for the same physical parameters, we see than the ratio is dependant on the frequency of the modulation, linked to the position of the co-rotation radius. We see that the ratio decreases from for small rc, which translates to a higher frequency, to for larger rc, meaning a lower frequency. Indeed, this is related to the fact that the flux modulation is, in particular, due to the beaming factor. The flux will be boosted when the hottest parts of the spiral are on the approaching side of the disk, while the flux will be deboosted when these hottest parts are on the receding side. This boosting is a strong function of inclination: it will be bigger for close to edge-on views because the emitter will then be traveling almost exactly towards the observer. Furthermore, as we get far from the blackhole, the effect of the beaming will decrease, and will thus be less important for lower QPO frequencies (higher rc).

Figure [\ref=fig:ratio_rms_incli] is impossible to compare directly with the results of [\citet=motta15] since these authors average several sources, hence different blackhole masses, which in turn mean the same QPO frequencies do not correspond to the same distance in the disk, and to different inclinations and different times of their outburst evolution. On the contrary, here we look at the amplitude dependence on inclination for exactly the same system at different QPO frequencies, which is clearly not what happens in an outburst, since the source evolves dynamically. Nevertheless, it is already interesting to see that the same system, under the same conditions, does indeed have a different amplitude, depending on the inclination of the system, and that this difference evolves, depending on the position of the spiral in the disk.

Case of the pulse profile in high-inclination systems

While the previous section focused on the amplitude of the QPO, there is more to QPOs than just a frequency and an amplitude. Indeed, here we have access to the exact pulse profile. This allows us to study the more direct impact of inclination on the lightcurve.

Shape of the pulse

In Fig. [\ref=fig:LC_spiral], we show one period of three pulse profiles for three different locations of the spiral, as seen from an inclination of [formula]. We have chosen the same position/frequency as in Fig. [\ref=fig:LC_spiral_rc] so that it is easier to compare both cases. The main difference with the [formula] inclination case is that, at high inclination, the detailed shape of the pulse is clearly not sinusoidal. This implies that any Fourier decomposition will contain more than one frequency, even when the initial signal in our model only has one. This effect comes from Doppler boosting and the varying apparent area of the spiral on the observer's sky, and it gets stronger with inclination. We explore how this should be visible on the PDS in the next section .

However, it is worth mentioning another possible way of detecting this change in the shape of the pulse profile, even without having access to its details. Indeed, in Fig. [\ref=fig:LC_spiral] we see that for high-inclination systems,

While this is hardly detectable all the time, we may find some high-inclination systems that have a strong QPO around a few Hz in a steady enough observation in which we can try to assess the time spent above and below the mean value. Perhaps this would be worth investigating in, for example, the Plateau state of GRS 1915+105? While the resolution needed to look at it on a pulse timescale is beyond the capacity of past and present satellites, it would be an interesting new observable to differentiate between models for future missions.

Impact on the PDS

As seen in the previous section, the shape of the pulse profile departs more and more from a sinusoid as the inclination of the system increases from almost face-on to almost edge-on. When looking at it in the Fourier space, this departure translates into more harmonics that might be more easily detectable than a difference in the pulse profile.

To compute the power density spectrum, we extended our lightcurve to 20 orbits and added a 1 / f noise. Also, as we are interested in comparing the extent of the harmonic structure with respect to inclination, we re-normalized the amplitude of the fundamental peak in each case to 1. This allows us to compare only the relative strength of the different peaks.

In the case of a close to edge-on view, we get a much richer and stronger harmonic content. Indeed, while the simulation we ran had one mode present (one-arm spiral). This behavior of richer harmonic content for high-inclination systems does not seem to depend on the frequency of the modulation,

However, care must be taken when interpreting this result since instabilities that give rise to spiral waves in a disk tend to have more than one mode and therefore the original signal could be more complex than the case with only one mode that is presented here. The different modes are in a close to harmonic relationship and could therefore lead to harmonic peaks in the PDS. Nevertheless, these instabilities also tend to have such a degree of competition between modes (more as a transition from one to another) and it should not be difficult to detect this.

Conclusion

In this paper we looked at a simplified version of the spiral formed by accretion ejection instability and studied the lightcurves that are observable from this type of system. Our main goal was to study how the amplitude of the observed lightcurve depends not only on the frequency of the QPO, but also on its inclination, with respect to the observer.

Our model predicts that, for a similar spiral structure, at a given frequency, the amplitude is strongly dependent on inclination and increases at high inclination. Using parameters in agreement with both numerical simulations and observations, our simple model is able to produce amplitudes that differ by an amount of for high-inclination ([formula]) with respect to low-inclination ([formula]) sources. Thus it is in agreement with the recent study of [\citet=motta15], which shows higher amplitudes from high-inclination sources, although it is not possible to directly compare the actual amplitude ratio predicted by our simulations with observations, since we do not know if the observed sources were in a state that is similar to our model.

Another interesting point raised by our ability to produce detailed lightcurves is how the pulse profile of these QPO changes with frequency and inclination. It becomes less and less sinusoidal as the source inclination increases. This translates into a richer harmonic content in the power spectrum. While there is no statistically significant proof that high-inclination sources have a significantly higher harmonic content than low inclination sources, it is coherent with the data gathered in [\citet=motta15] (private communication). This would be worth exploring in more detail, especially if other QPO models have distinct predictions.