Introduction

The rise of more creative and powerful simulation, modeling, and computation along with a superlinear expansion in both the variety and size of data is transforming science, [\cite=evans2010philosophy] [\cite=hey2009fourth]. From high energy physics to cosmology, biology, and genetics, sophisticated instrumentation, massive, high throughput experiments and observatories are increasingly leveraged by scientists and scholars to validate deep, longstanding theories in almost passive, "lazy", or merely observational ways [\cite=aad2012observation] [\cite=abbott2016observation] [\cite=covert2004integrating].

Nevertheless, in many fields, it is still too often the case that deep theory remains untested due to a relative dearth of available, system wide data that would be necessary and sufficient for validation. Data of the commensurate size and shape needed to validate a big theory is often either merely unattainable, too expensive to derive, too elusive to observe, and, for some theories, it may simply be unclear what would so much as count as appropriate data in the first place. Where the requisite data needed to validate a given theory or even observe a theorized phenomenon is lacking, researchers often turn to various methods of indirect detection. An obvious example here is the search for empirical validation of the existence of weakly interacting massive particles [\cite=conrad2014indirect] [\cite=beltran2009deducing].

Perhaps not as obviously, many macroeconomic theories, the validity of which carry huge practical, political, and social ramifications, also rely on indirect detection for validation. Data for inferring the dynamics of many subnational, national, and global economy-wide phenomena (e.g., employment, income, production) are gathered through national income and product accounts surveys. Given that these data are collected almost exclusively through surveying, they are often very small relative to the object of study. For instance, in the United States, data on national unemployment is gathered monthly by the Bureau of Labor and Statistics by surveying roughly 0.02% of U.S. households with additional data weighting and adjustments to enhance their stability over time, [\cite=united2006current]. As a result, these data and the dynamics that are subsequently inferred from them are often unreliable. For example, [\cite=kaplan2012interstate] demonstrated that much of the observed decrease in US interstate migration was, in fact, a statistical artifact attributable to the Census Bureau's introduction of a seemingly minor change to its procedures for imputing missing data.

Moreover, many nations either lack the necessary organizational or administrative infrastructure to construct accurate and reliable national accounts, or they seek to frustrate the transparency of accounts data for political reasons or economic gain as noted in [\cite=nordhaus2006geography] [\cite=sinton2001accuracy]. As a result, many theories central to macroeconomics often have outsized influence on policy even when empirical validation of those theories is missing or, worse, misleading. Extensive discussion of related issues in [\cite=rogoff2010growth] [\cite=herndon2014does] [\cite=Leamer2007] stresses the importance of rigorous model verification using variety of methods.

While it is not at all clear what the direct observation of, for instance, gross domestic product (GDP), would be, it has been demonstrated that reliable proxies other than variables in national accounts data can been derived through the passive remote sensing of the earth's surface from space. In particular, nighttime luminosity data has been shown convincingly to be a useful and reliable proxy for socioeconomic statistics [\cite=ghosh2010shedding] [\cite=levin2012high] [\cite=henderson2012measuring] [\cite=chen2011using] [\cite=elvidge2012night].

Crucially, recent work has shown robust correlations between the relative intensity of spatially disagregatted nighttime luminosity and GDP at both national and subnational resolutions. Moreover, this work has demonstrated that using nighttime luminosity does particularly well at resolving national and subnational GDP in countries that otherwise lack the administrative statistical infrastructure necessary to derive high-quality national accounts data [\cite=nordhaus2015sharper]. However, by observing statistical correlations between terrestrial light spillage and GDP, the extant literature on leveraging nighttime luminosity data for economic analysis has done little to inform or validate theory about global growth and production dynamics.

In this paper, we argue and demonstrate that passive remote sensing of the earth's surface can be leveraged to do more than merely proxy static accounting. Remote sensing can be used to add robustness to and support the empirical validation of economic theories. As stated above, the macroeconomic tradition for the observation and measurement of phenomena that are predicted by theory has been the employment of surveying and accounting to gather data to which a model can be fit. Apart from precise geographic and temporal resolution, the obvious benefits from these means of data acquisition are the uniform units of measure which are central to the internal structure of a given macroeconomic theory. However, to say nothing of the severe and highly problematic limitations introduced by sample size, the obvious drawbacks surround precision and accuracy of the measured units so that efforts to improve models and, therefore, theory require, at bottom, efforts to improve the institutional infrastructure needed for such measurement. At a deeper level, for the purposes of validation, the constraint placed on the primary models of these theories by their parameterization and the near axiomatic requirement of specific units (e.g., currency values) of measure in those parameters will ceaselessly frustrate attempts to resolve inconsistencies between theoretical assumptions and observed data. This may seem trivially obvious, but resolving such inconsistencies without substantial modification to either method or theory (or both) is anything but. These problems are further compounded when the phenomena predicted by theory are, seemingly, only observable by such indirect means.

In what follows, we introduce a novel method with its own, independent set of micro-state assumptions and conditions to detect, sense, or "observe" the theorized macroeconomic phenomena known as "economic convergence" and "divergence". In particular, we will use the magnitude of detectable light spillage over time as a salient proxy for human economic activity. Given that, theories of economic convergence and divergence are, at bottom, concerned with relative changes in economic activity over time, our approach can serve to supply robustness to these theories since the derivation, identification, and measurement of these phenomena can be achieved with novel parameters that are completely independent from those used in all adjacent models. Moreover, in [\cite=friedman1992old] it was strongly argued that the real test of economic convergence is a consistent diminution of variance, not among the means of aggregate variables, but among individual enterprises and households, there by, rather indirectly, arguing against the plausibility of observing convergence dynamics in models of aggregate national accounts data.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section [\ref=sec:setup] describes our data and method, Section [\ref=sec:results] presents our results, and Section [\ref=sec:conclusion] serves as a summary and discussion.

Setup: data and method

There are several flavors of the macroeconomic theory of convergence. In this paper, we are concerned mainly with so called "σ-convergence" predicting a decrease in the dispersion of income/growth across countries as opposed to the somewhat weaker β-convergence which holds that the economies of poorer countries will grow more rapidly than those of richer ones. In [\cite=young2008sigma] it was shown that β-convergence is a necessary but not sufficient condition for "σ-convergence". There are a number of proposed and plausible explanations for why this dynamic should occur. For instance, in a globalized economy, relatively rich nations will experience faster rates of diminishing returns on freely traded means of production, technologies, and innovations, than poorer countries. As a result, poorer countries will realize faster relative rates of growth than rich countries. Moreover, the literature is littered with interpretations of what so much as counts as growth characteristics for nations [\cite=piketty2014capital] [\cite=durlauf1999new] [\cite=easterly] [\cite=nordhaus1996real] [\cite=rodrik2013unconditional] [\cite=sala1996classical].

Sampling issues further frustrate attempts to observe convergence. For instance, [\cite=sala1996classical] observed that the estimated speeds of β-convergence are so surprisingly similar across data sets, that economists can use a simple rule: economies will converge at a speed of two percent per year. And in [\cite=young2008sigma] it is was argued that σ-convergence did not occur across the United States, or within a majority of the individual U.S. states, from 1970 to 1998. Up to a point, our work, below, seems affirm the former. However, in the wake of the economic crisis and in the data after 2008, we also observe strong divergence dynamics. So, in certain contexts, at certain statistical moments, and under certain decompositions of the theory itself, our work lends credibility to both. That is, depending on where, when, and how (with what instrument) one looks, one can obverse strong convergence or strong divergence dynamics. Ultimately, we believe that this supports the need for a gentle reassessment of the criteria, data, and instruments employed and deployed. While proposed explanations for why the existence of such theorized dynamics should occur may be intellectually or politically satisfying, from the perspective of economic theory, they ultimately do more to direct attention toward data and model selection rather than to establish the validity of the theory itself. We argue that the following discussion contributes a novel model of an additional, independent data set that provides evidence for the existence of convergence and divergence dynamics.

To generate an independent model for observing convergence and divergence dynamics, we turned to the version 4 DMSP-OLS Nighttime Lights Time Series collected by the US Air Force Weather Agency, [\cite=doll2008ciesin] [\cite=baugh2010development]. The cloud-free, stable lights composites were processed using the entirety of the available archive data for the 1992-2013 period. The analyzed products are 30 arc second grids, spanning -180 to 180 degrees longitude and -65 to 75 degrees latitude whereby the resulting data arrays include ≈  730M observed pixels with ≈  20M non-zero (or active) pixels per year.

Previous work [\cite=ghosh2010shedding] has established that this specific dataset has some substantive benefits in estimating quantifiable economic activity, one of which using objective observations and another is related to real-time high spatial resolution without artificial data segmentation by administrative boundaries and varying accounting principles. Nevertheless, like most of the standard, national accounting approaches, mentioned above, the use of nighttime lights has limitations. The most practical limitation is introduced by the impossibility of establishing a precise mapping from the rate and luminal intensity of nighttime light leakage and the World Bank's standard metrics (e.g. USD) for GDP. Additionally, the annual composites across years that are recorded by distinct satellites cannot be compared directly with each other due to differences in on-board calibration. The annual variability of cloud dynamics is also a factor affecting the statistical reliability and precision of estimates, especially in areas for which there are fewer observations as noted in [\cite=free2014trends] [\cite=norris2015empirical].

To address these issues while, simultaneously keeping the data array of observations as intact and free of adjustments as possible, we apply a differencing technique with zero mean difference centering. While we cannot completely rid our data of spurious local and global variability due to various measurement factors, this method is appealing both for its simplicity and for its clear empirical findings. Subsequent improvement is certainly possible by, for example, combining and aligning with independent data sets on cloud formation and behavioral dynamics with a possibility of real-time monitoring of objects condition.

Intensities for nighttime lights are represented by the time-indexed array Xt(i,j), where [formula] and each element contains the intensity of light detected for a pixel with a given longitude lon(i) and latitude lat(j). We perform the following differencing for all pixels to obtain:

[formula]

At each time step, we then center the differences in pixel light intensity by subtracting the globally averaged value of differences between years.

where [formula] is an indicator function that is zero for all pixels with no change in intensity and one for all pixels with changed intensity.

Thus, we filter away both pixels that do not have any signal and pixels that do not show any difference when zero-mean centered between annual time steps. What is more, this also helps us to avoid a known issue with saturation of light intensity due to detector sensitivity. Static, saturated areas (e.g. urban centers) are automatically filtered with a resultant time series providing a dynamic characterization of detected changes. Obviously, there could be meaningful changes in economic activity in these saturated areas that are, due to filtering, not detected and, therefore, remain hidden. However, and perhaps surprisingly, we still observe detectable changes in highly urban and well-developed areas with highly variable light spillage contributing to the indirect detection of economic activity patterns that could be further correlated with other known and observed data on social and economic events. For instance, as small capillaries wend fluctuations toward and away form great estuaries in our data, streams of traffic of higher of lower intensity can be, perhaps, detected spilling out of urban central districts on their evening commutes and or carrying out freight delivery.

Results and discussion

The mean global average pixel light intensity growth is at 3% annually in our data sample. There is noticeable variance in that value both across years for globally averaged data (〈σg〉 = 15%) and across pixels for the same year.

In what follows, we present a number of observations that demonstrate global, national, and subnational convergence and divergence in intensities of terrestrial nighttime luminosity. We argue that these deltas represent relative changes in economic activity and that the model and data independence should be thought of as supplying robustness σ-convergence theory.

Fig. [\ref=fig:qqplots](left) shows a typical quantile-quantile (q-q) plot for the resulting zero-mean centered difference distribution against a normal distribution. Our night light change distribution has fat tails with a small density of pixels close to normal near the mean value.

In all of our graphs, representing the global maps, we saturate the color of deviations from the mean that exceed a given threshold set to 0.5% of relative difference across all graphs. Fig. [\ref=fig:qqplots](right) confirms that samples from different years come from a similar distribution (e.g., AF satellites are looking at the same planet). However, there are important differences across years. For example, pixels in the Middle East that were previously growing in relative intensity suddenly shift into a depressed slide as the region slips into a series of well documented wars and episodes of tremendous civil unrest.

Fig. [\ref=fig:growth](left) shows cumulative change in 1992-2002 (Y axis) vs 2003-2006 (X axis) with color coded pixels based on total intensity growth in 1992-2006 subsample. Fig. [\ref=fig:growth](right) shows cumulative change in 2008-2013 (Y axis) vs 1992-2007 (X axis) with color coded pixels based on total intensity growth in 1992-2013 sample. A 45-degree (positive sloped) line corresponds to autocorrelation of growth and, therefore, an increase in divergence of growth over time as faster growing pixels persistently outperform slower ones. We see that post-2007 growth shows a noticeable divergence along the systemically high-growth area of the spectrum. However, overall, most points are clustered in either anti-correlated or not correlated quadrants thereby providing support for the idea that general convergence mechanisms are in effect.

We also compute the cumulative standard deviation of our vectorized data array

[formula]

.

Fig. [\ref=fig:growth_divergence] shows global change variability before and after the Great Recession event. We see again, that there is support for the global σ- convergence theory after the end of the Cold War period and before the Great Recession. However, there is strong evidence for economic divergence in the years immediately following the economy wide shocks delivered by the financial crisis with long and persistent recovery dynamics.

Much can be learned simply by looking. To look more closely at these phenomena, we produced maps of the Northern hemisphere (where ≈  90% of the world's population resides) with color-coded values of [formula]. Fig. [\ref=fig:global] shows the total, mean-centered change over a period of 22 years spanning 1992-2013. Purple circles pinpoint the locations of major cities. Blue-coded areas correspond to net negative dynamics (decay) and red-colored areas to net positive dynamics (growth). Neutral changes are not distinguishable from the black background. The major economic transformations following the end of Cold War are clearly visible with, for example, the net positive rise of China and the decline of US industry, capital transfers within the European Union with net net beneficiaries in Eastern Europe and Scandinavia, growth in India and China alongside the relative decline in Pakistan and Syria. The development of shale oil drilling along side conventional oil extraction techniques represent important factors in economic production and development and their impact can be clearly observed in the northern United States.

There is a substantial amount of policy relevant heterogeneity in economic development both inside and across countries that is demonstrably impossible to observe using mean-aggregated data only. Alternately, the correlation between photons emitted as a byproduct of economic transactions and economic development has been described in the literature, for example [\cite=nordhaus1996real]. Energy conservation and technology improvements should, in theory, lead to increases in terrestrial light spillage. Of course, the increasing density of population in urban areas is a factor. However, as we can see from Fig. [\ref=fig:global], there is a visible effect from growth of suburbia and general urban sprawl that is not stable with zero-mean in our mean-centered time series. Nevertheless, applying spatial statistical methods to characterize dynamic processes to support our general qualitative findings is not trivial due to substantial spatial autocorrelation and biased observations.

Fig. [\ref=fig:us] represents a decomposition of the total mean-centered change into annual averages for the period of 2003-2007 (left) as compared to 2007-2011 (right) for the continental US/Canada at the mid latitudes (35-50N, 70-100W). There is a distinct observable contrast between auto manufacturing states and regions that obtained government support during the Great Recession, for example, as well as stark, negative changes in economic dynamics of southern states, such as Kentucky and Tennessee.

Fig. [\ref=fig:eu](left, right) represents the same period decomposition for Europe (30-70N, 10W-60E), the right graph roughly corresponds to where the Eurozone crisis began to develop in 2009 and reaching its critical stage in 2011. The dynamics reflecting the Arab Spring and the Greek debt crisis are also clearly visible, as are the construction of Olympic infrastructure in Sochi, Russia.

Fig. [\ref=fig:as](left, right) represents the same period decomposition for Asia (5S-45N, 60-140E) with an observably more stable regional balance alongside a noticeable difference between rapidly developing southern coastal China against northern and inland China. Moreover, lagging economic development in Pakistan and accelerating activity in Myanmar, Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia can be seen clearly. Interestingly, certain consistent characteristic social-spatial institutions including the lighting of the India-Pakistan border through time, as noted in [\cite=doll2008ciesin], can serve as reference markers for processed images.

Finally, the comparison panels in Fig. [\ref=fig:rust](left, center, right) represent the U.S. Rust Belt vs vs. China vs. Germany for 1999 - 2011 period. [\cite=autor2016china] observes that the steep decline in U.S. manufacturing jobs began around the turn of the 21st century and coincided with an exponential increase U.S. imports of Chinese manufactured goods and that the cumulative U.S. job losses attributable to this manufacturing shift are anywhere between 1 and 5.5MM. In this figure, we can clearly observe the severe decline in activity in the U.S. panel (left), the robust acceleration of activity in China (center). We include Germany in this Fig. [\ref=fig:rust] because it, too, is a major manufacturing hub and exporter but with different social, labor, and trade policies from both the U.S. and China. The relative growth that we see in Germany reveals an opportunity for possible comparison studies and highlights our method's capacity for suggestion.

Conclusion

Our mean-centered differencing procedure filters the effects of known mean value biases in remote sensing otherwise caused by ground or on-board sensor conditions. As a result, our approach can provide reliable and interesting metrics across time and space that qualitatively agree with evidence from other data sources. While it is certainly possible to enhance obtained metrics with quantitative interpolation across socioeconomic datasets to micro- and macro-levels using regressions, interpolations and other statistical, geospatial methods, we stress the importance of a meso-level observation of the regional and time specific flow patterns here that have not been discussed or considered in the extant literature.

To date, no studies have looked at variance in global nighttime luminosity data across time as a proxy for convergence and divergence phenomena or, for that matter, any theorized dynamic economic phenomena. Previous work has merely noted correlations between nighttime lights and aggregate static accounts data (e.g., GDP). One likely reason for the relative scarcity of such studies is the lack of examples of big data analysis in economics that leverage interesting higher statistical moments and patterns that are computed and analyzed rigorously, with rare exceptions in ([\cite=yoshikawa2015deflation] [\cite=butaru2015risk] [\cite=burdick2014data] [\cite=giesecke2016]). We argue that more research is needed that makes use of big (complex) data and takes seriously the theoretical underpinnings of the aggregate models currently in use. This will not only lead to improvements in current theory, but also shows promise for validation, rejection, and, even, introduction of theory.

Passive remote sensing of the earth's surface using satellites can allow researchers to obtain real-time proxies for economic activity that are spatially and temporally well-defined. As opposed to the somewhat fictitious aggregate data generated by world's tax optimized accounting, where investments in production and sales of products can be artificially separated in offshore holding companies with country of origin labels attached that do not reflect the actual economic transactions, seeing is believing. Moreover, while most survey-based data can also be misleading due to sample biases and hidden information, here we have a global dataset with complete coverage of nighttime photon spillage from human activity with, arguably, leading real-time indicators of economic activity that can be useful for a more precise characterization of on the ground economic development as well as early crisis warnings when investments do not realize growth in economic output as, otherwise, expected. We observe both support for the broad σ-convergence theory in the post-Cold war period as well as strong divergence dynamics immediately following the financial crisis and Great Recession with, moreover, observable patterns of growth that are correlated in time with governmental policies introduced in the wake of economic shocks.

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Author's contributions

ED and VZ conceived and designed the research. VZ acquired and analyzed the data. ED and VZ interpreted the results. All authors discussed, wrote, and approved the final version of the manuscript.

Acknowledgements

This work was completed in part with resources provided by the University of Chicago Research Computing Center and a generous gift from Facebook.