=

1.25in .125in .25in

Evolution of Mass Distribution in CDM Halos

Introduction

In this talk, I review some of the recent work by my collaborators (especially my former PhD student James Bullock) and me on the distribution of dark matter in galaxy-size halos and its evolution with redshift. I summarize results from several recent papers, in particular Bullock et al. (1999), Gonzalez et al. (2000), Sigad et al. (2000), Klypin et al. (2000), and Bullock et al. (2000). Avishai Dekel in his talk summarized related work by our group on the distribution of angular momentum in dark matter halos.

New results on the centers of dark matter halos

The ART code (Kravtsov, Klypin, & Khokhlov 1997) starts with a uniform grid treated with a Particle-Mesh algorithm, but refines all high-density regions using an automated refinement mechanism, with the time-step correspondingly reduced. Extensive new tests of the ART code and comparison with other simulation codes are presented in Kravtsov (1999) and Knebe et al. (2000). In an earlier paper, Kravtsov et al. (1998) (discussed also in Primack et al. 1999), we analyzed ART simulations which resolved dozens of halos in small volumes for CDM, CHDM, and ΛCDM cosmologies. We concluded that the central density behavior is [formula], with γ typically [formula] but ranging from about 0 to 1 for different halos. There we used results from ART simulations with a maximum formal dynamic range of [formula], corresponding to a best formal resolution (size of the smallest refinement mesh cell) of [formula] kpc, and we used only results for ≥  2lmesh. This was because the convergence study that we described in that paper showed that for a fixed mass resolution the halo density profiles converged at 2lmesh as we increased the force resolution.

For reliable results at the centers of dark matter halos it is also necessary to consider the effects of mass resolution. We have now done a more careful analysis of the convergence by simulating the same galaxy-mass halo with increasing numbers of particles. Our highest resolution runs achieved a formal spatial dynamical range of 217 = 131,072; the simulation was run with 500,000 steps at the highest level of refinement. Here we concentrated on the ΛCDM cosmology. We used a new version of the ART code with particles of various masses, so that we could put the lowest-mass particles in the region of the box containing the halo we were interested in and higher mass particles farther away. Our results show that there is no change in the simulated density profile as we increase the number of particles by a very large factor, down to a radius of at least 4 times the formal force resolution and containing at least 200 simulation particles. We find that ρNFW(r) is a good fit to our highest resolution halos, although we show that several other popular analytic formulas also give good fits. In particular, the NFW formula is a good (better than 10%) fit to our halos down to 0.01 of the virial radius, which corresponds to [formula] kpc for the dwarf and LSB galaxies that are often compared to model predictions. It is hardly possible to measure rotation curves of such galaxies at smaller radii, and even if one could do so there are various physical effects that would make it difficult to interpret the results in terms of a density profile. Note that, although the logslope of the NFW density profile is -1 in the limit as r  →  0, at 0.01 of the virial radius the logslope is considerably steeper. For simulated halos the actual density profiles have features that deviate from smooth fitting formulas such as NFW, and at least some of these features appear to reflect the merging history of the halos.

Based on our new convergence study, we no longer trust the results reported in Kravtsov et al. (1998) concerning the very centers of halos. In particular, our results concerning the shallow central slopes depended on trusting our simulations between 2 and 4 times the formal resolution. However, all the results in Kravtsov et al. (1998) at radii greater than 4 times the formal resolution should still be valid, including the scatter in profile shapes and the agreement between the Vmax vs. rmax relations of simulated dark halos and those of dark-matter-dominated dwarf and LSB galaxies. However, since the HI data on some of these galaxies was affected by beam-smearing (van den Bosch et al. 2000) and Hα data is now available for some of them (Swaters et al. 2000, Swaters & van den Bosch 2000; cf. contributions by Swaters and van den Bosch to these proceedings), it would be worthwhile to repeat this analysis.

The new Hα data resolves much of the concern (e.g., Flores & Primack 1994) with rotation curves of dark-matter-dominated galaxies contradicting the cuspy halos from CDM simulations. The main related concern about too many small satellite halos compared to the number of observed satellite galaxies in the local group has been most convincingly addressed by the model of Bullock, Kravtsov, & Weinberg (2000), presented in two posters at this meeting. They show that only those small halos that have collapsed before the epoch of reionization will accrete gas and subsequently be able to produce stars, and that the numbers of the resulting small satellites -- both those observed, and those subsequently accreted by the Milky Way -- are in excellent agreement with observations.

Distribution and evolution of halo concentration

The convergence study of Klypin et al. (2000) shows that ART simulation halos with as few as [formula] particles can be used to get accurate values for the NFW parameter rs (where the logslope of ρ(r) is -2), as long as the NFW fit is restricted to begin at a sufficiently large radius. In Bullock et al. (1999), thousands of halos from a 60 h- 1 Mpc volume simulation of ΛCDM were analyzed at many redshifts to determine the distribution of halo concentration as a function of redshift. As Fig. 1 (a) shows, a simulation with the same number of particles (2563) in a 30 h- 1 Mpc box which was run to redshift z = 1.7 gave essentially identical results for the distribution of halo concentrations for halos of [formula] at overlapping redshifts, despite the fact that identical mass halos had 8 times as many particles in the smaller box simulation.

We define the halo concentration as [formula], where the virial radius Rvir is defined as the radius within which the mean density is the virial overdensity Δvir times the average density at that redshift ρave. The value of Δvir, determined from the spherical top hat collapse approximation, depends on the cosmology and the redshift (see Bullock et al. 1999 for details). For the Ωm = 0.3 ΛCDM cosmology that we discuss, Δvir  ≈  340 at z = 0. (The definition above differs from that of NFW, who defined [formula], where R200 corresponds to Δ = 200, appropriate for an Einstein-de Sitter cosmology.)

The dark matter halos in a fixed mass range at any redshift have approximately a log-normal distribution of concentrations (Jing 2000, Bullock et al. 1999). In Bullock et al. (1999) we present a simple analytic model for the concentration of dark matter halos. Like the model presented in Navarro, Frenk, & White (1997), it relates the concentration of a halo to the epoch when a certain fraction of the final mass in that halo had already collapsed; and like the NFW model, it correctly predicts the average halo concentration as a function of halo mass at redshift z = 0. But unlike the NFW model, it also correctly predicts the concentration as a function of redshift (see Fig. 1 (b)). In particular, it gives the [formula] behavior that is evident in Fig. 1.

Our model also correctly accounts for the observed 1-σ spread of concentrations (shown in Fig. 1 by the upper and lower dashed curves) in terms of the spread in halo formation epochs due to the Gaussian distribution of fluctuation amplitudes in CDM. The spread in halo concentrations has a large effect on galaxy rotation curve shapes, comparable to the effect of the well-known log-normal distribution of halo spin parameters λ. Frank van den Bosch (2000) showed, based on a semi-analytic model for galaxy formation including supernova feedback, that the spread in λ mainly results in movement along the Tully-Fisher line, while the spread in concentration results in dispersion perpendicular to the TF relation. Remarkably, he found that the dispersion in CDM halo concentrations produces a TF dispersion that is consistent with the observed one.

In order to compare theoretical rotation curves to those of actual galaxies, it is necessary to take into account the effects on the dark matter halo of the dissipative collapse of the baryons that form the disk. In the papers (Blumenthal et al. 1986, Flores et al. 1993) that first discussed the effect of baryonic infall on galaxy rotation curves, we considered z = 0 galaxy disks to have formed at [formula]. Since in our study of CDM halo evolution we find that the concentration evolves [formula], this would clearly result in lower concentration than if we used the z = 0 halo properties. This is a topic that requires further investigation before we can properly compare concentrations of observed galaxies with predictions of CDM models.

Galaxy velocity function from luminosity function and luminosity-velocity relations

A strength of CDM models is that it is possible to calculate the number density of halos with given properties. Although it is also possible to predict the number density of galaxies as a function of their luminosity by means of semi-analytic models (e.g., Somerville & Primack 1999), calculating luminosities of galaxies in CDM halos requires treatment of the poorly understood processes of gas cooling, star formation, and feedback, and many simplifications are necessary. The velocity function is a much simpler connection between theory and observation. Luminosity-velocity relations derived from observations -- the Tully-Fisher and Faber-Jackson relations -- allow one to construct approximate galaxy velocity functions from the observed galaxy luminosity functions. These are approximate since it is necessary to average over galaxy inclination for spiral galaxies, and for surveys in which the morphologies of galaxies were not determined it is necessary to make the approximation that all galaxies are spiral galaxies. However, in Gonzalez et al. (2000) we showed that the resulting uncertainty in the number density of galaxies with rotation velocity ~  200 km  s -  1 is only about a factor of 2. We found that the observational number density determined this way agrees well with that predicted in ΛCDM with Ωm = 0.3 if we don't take into account the effect of baryonic infall, although it is perhaps a bit low when we do take this into account. New surveys, in particular the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, will determine the luminosity function much more accurately, and it will be important to measure the corresponding Tully-Fisher relation and compare the resulting velocity function to the predictions of cosmological models.

The fact that the luminosity-velocity relations work so well in the nearby universe raises the question whether they will continue to hold at higher redshift. In a recent paper (Bullock et al. 2000, based in part on the detailed analysis of ΛCDM velocity functions in Sigad et al. 2000), we point out that in the observationally favored ΛCDM cosmology with Ωm = 0.3 and σ8 = 1, the number density of halos with maximum circular velocity V max = 200 km  s -  1 increases only by about 30% between redshift 0 and 3, and then declines back to the local value by z = 5. If the luminosity-velocity relations continue to hold at these higher redshifts, the implication is that the comoving number density of bright galaxies should increase. This appears to contradict the data from the Northern Hubble Deep Field (Dickinson 2000), which shows a dramatic decrease in the number of bright galaxies above redshift [formula]. So this suggests that the luminosity-velocity relations may change or perhaps even become stochastic at higher redshifts. The Keck DEEP survey will attempt to measure the internal velocities of [formula] galaxies at [formula], which should allow a direct test of this. Understanding the evolution of the luminosity-velocity relations may perhaps clarify their physical origin.

Acknowledgments. I thank all my collaborators for many enlightening discussions on these topics. I am grateful for support from NASA and NSF grants at UCSC, and from a Humboldt Award at the Max Planck Institute for Physics, Munich.