Splash control using geometric targets

Introduction

When a liquid drop impacts with a smooth solid dry surface, it will expand horizontally outward until internal and external forces create asymmetry. This instability leads to the droplet breaking apart in a "splash". The dynamics of splashing as a result of liquid drops and solid surface impacts have been studied extensively, particularly when the surface is much larger than the drop. Here, this fluid dynamics video investigates impacts between fluid droplets and geometrical substrates of equal length scale.

The liquid used has a viscosity of 1 cP and surface tension of 0.353 N/m. It is composed of de-ionized water and food coloring, for image enhancement purposes. Liquid drops are created by allowing water at room temperature ([formula]C) to slowly drip out of a small capillary tube. Water is injected into the tube using a low-noise syringe pump (Harvard Instruments). Reproducible drops are created with average diameter of 2.8 mm. Drops fall from a height of 13 cm before striking the target, hitting the surface with a velocity of 2 m/s resulting in a Reynolds (Re) number equal to 540 and a Weber (We) number equal to 250. Here, Re is defined as ρvd / μ and We is defined as ρv2d / γ where ρ is the fluid density, v is the drop velocity, d is the drop diameter, μ is dynamic viscosity , and γ is the surface tension. Top and side view images are recorded using high speed photography at 30,000 frames per second (Fastcam SA1.1, Photron USA Inc.). The images in this fluid dynamics video are shown at 25 frames per second.

The targets are posts made out of polyoxymethylene plastic with no surface treatments. The cylindrical post has a diameter of 2.7 mm and a surface area of 5.73 mm2. The other polygonal posts have cross sectional shapes such as an equilateral triangle, a square, a pentagon, and a hexagon with equal impacting surface area of 5.73 mm2.

When a droplet impacts a cylindrical post, the resulting splash is axisymmetric. However, as the geometry of the post is changed, the dynamics of the splash and finger formation is altered drastically. Surprisingly, the resulting splash resembles the shape of the target with a clockwise rotation equal to π / N, where N is the number of vertices. The break up of the drop and number of fingers that form can be accurately controlled and is observed to be equal to the number of vertices. For example, a drop impacting with a triangular post results in a triangular splash that is shifted by [formula] with respect to the triangular post. This splash then breaks up into three distinct fingers after reaching its maximum splash radius.

The video showing drops impacting small geometric targets as described above can be found at the following URLs:

This video has been submitted to the American Physical Society division of fluid dynamics annual meeting showcase, the Gallery of Fluid Motion 2010.