=1

Remote control of moving sessile droplets

Introduction

Microfluidics motivate both fundamental and applied researches ([\cite=micro]). The challenge is to find an optimal process to manipulate small liquid quantities in order to study chemical reactions, biological molecules and processes, or to perform biomedical tests. A possible way is the sessile drop displacement on surfaces, the other one consisting in the displacement of liquid in small channels. We recently put in evidence that combined vertical and horizontal vibrations can be used to reach a controlled droplet motion. In this fluid dynamics video (which can be seen at the following URL: ) we generalize this finding and show that a simple vibrating apparatus can be efficiently used to control the motion of supported droplets.

Videos description by parts.

1) Part I. We show that the motion of a supported water droplet is remotely controlled using a joystick. Both up, down, right and left motions are controlled. The substrate is made of a PDMS elastomer and the water droplet has an equilibrium wetting angle around 100  o.

2) Part II. We are now able to drive the droplet to a target deposited on the substrate. The target is a dye powder (fluorescein) deposited on the upper right of the substrate. Note that the used of vibrations enhanced the mixing of the powder within the droplet.

3) Part III. We use a stroboscopic illumination to explain the motion of the drop. Vertical vibrations are inducing a "pumping mode" ([\cite=chodu], [\cite=noblin1]) while horizontal ones are inducing the "rocking mode" ([\cite=celestini]). When both vibrations are applied, a ratchet-like motion is induced ([\cite=noblin2]). The direction of the motion is controlled through the phase shift between the two vibrations. In the present experiment the horizontal and vertical vibration frequencies are equal to 70 Hz.

4) part IV. We illustrate the ability for the drop to be completely controlled by our joystick. The game for the big drop, is to eat the other small droplets.

The vibration frequencies are the same in x, y, z directions, and fixed here to 70 Hz. The drop is of order one millimeter in radius. The liquid is pure water or fluorescein solution. The substrate is made of a piece of PDMS elastomer.