=1

A precise method to determine the activity of a weak neutron source using a germanium detector

Introduction

As neutrons are difficult to detect, the absolute activity of a neutron source is challenging to measure. This difficulty increases as the activity of the source is lowered. Sophisticated techniques exist for neutron activity measurements, including the manganese bath technique[\cite=MnBath], proton recoil techniques[\cite=ProtonRecoil] and the use of He proportional counters[\cite=3HeCounters]; nevertheless, the development of a method utilizing commonly found high purity germanium (HPGe) detectors would be advantageous.

HPGe's are an industry standard for measuring γ ray energies to high precision. Neutron Activation Analysis[\cite=NAA1][\cite=NAA2] (NAA) is ordinarily used to determine the elemental composition of materials, as well as to perform neutron flux and activity determinations. When a target material is exposed to a neutron flux, it results in the activation of previously stable isotopes in the material. The γ rays from the subsequent decay of the unstable activation products may be measured and used for neutron activity determination.

When determining neutron source activities on the order of 10 n/s, as in this study, the use of traditional NAA is inadequate. The low neutron flux and cross section activates insufficient quantities of isotopes, resulting in activities well below the detection limits of standard γ ray spectrometer systems. This paper presents modifications, which include the use of Monte Carlo simulations and the use of an HPGe detector, to accurately measure the activity of such weak neutron sources.

Experimental Setup

The detector system consists of a GC12023 HPGe detector from Canberra Industries. The crystal is 87.1 mm in diameter by 90.1 mm in length and is located within a 101.6 mm aluminum end cap. The detector is arranged at the centre of a graded shield: an inner 25.4 mm of copper and an outer shield of 250-540 mm of lead. A Canberra Lynx digital signal analyzer acquires the data.

The neutron source, made by Eckert & Ziegler Isotope Products, Inc., is an americium-beryllium (AmBe) AM241SNA02 source. It consists of a homogeneous mixture of americium oxide and beryllium metal within a double stainless steel encapsulation, each layer with a thickness of 0.8 mm. The manufacturer-specified activity of the Am in the AmBe source is 5.5 MBq. Neutrons are produced via the Be(α,n) reaction with Am as the α source. These neutrons are produced with a spectrum as shown in Figure [\ref=fig:CrossSections], with energies ranging up to 11 MeV[\cite=NeutronSpectrum].

Aluminum and acrylic were used as neutron targets. Aluminum has both fast (Al(n,n') and Al(n,p)) and thermal (Al(n,γ)) reactions with sufficient neutron cross sections. Acrylic serves well as a neutron moderator, with its high hydrogen content, and also has a thermal neutron reaction (H(n,γ)). The cross sections are shown in Figure [\ref=fig:CrossSections] along with the energy spectrum of neutrons produced from an AmBe source.

The targets were a 17.7 cm diameter by 2.7 cm thick aluminum disk (1.8 kg) and a set of six 19.0 cm diameter by 1.2 cm thick acrylic disks (0.4 kg each), with one disk having a 1.0 cm diameter hole in the centre to accommodate the neutron source, when necessary. The AmBe source irradiated these targets generating the γ rays from the reactions mentioned. Because of its low activity and the short lifetimes of the reaction products, the neutron source was placed along with the targets in the HPGe detector system.

This prompt NAA, with its in situ activation and measurement, exposes the HPGe crystal to a neutron flux that may potentially cause damage and result in resolution degradation. The total neutron exposure of the HPGe crystal during this experiment is estimated to be at or below 10 n/cm. Noticeable damage is seen to occur after total neutron exposures on the order of 10-10 n/cm [\cite=Damage]. No noticeable deterioration of the HPGe detector's performance was observed.

Measurements

Table [\ref=tab:geometries] lists the geometric configurations for all measurements performed, each for a period of approximately 24 hours. Varying the geometry in this way enabled the different thermal and fast neutron reactions to be measured independently. The count rate of a peak from a given reaction, Areaction, is determined by:

[formula]

Ameas is the peak count rate in a configuration with the target and source, Abkgd with the source only, and Alab with the target only. These correspond to columns 2, 3 and 4 of Table [\ref=tab:geometries], respectively.

Abkgd is the contribution from activation of components of the detector system from the measured data, such as the aluminum end cap of the HPGe. These were done in a way such that the only volume missing was the target volume. In the case of the aluminum disk geometries (1-5), the disk was removed and replaced with thin spacers to elevate the remaining acrylic disks to maintain the neutron source geometry. For the acrylic disk geometries (6 and 7), the disks were removed and the neutron source was placed on a spacer only.

Alab is the contribution from background neutrons in the laboratory, such as those from cosmogenic sources. These rates were determined by performing the measurements without the neutron source present. A small contribution was observed from the H(n,γ) reaction in geometries 6 and 7 (corresponding to 1.2%-1.6% of Ameas). The effect of Alab was negligible for all of the other reactions across the series of geometries.

Simulation

Simulations were made using Geant4[\cite=Geant4]. Geant4 tracks particles traveling through matter, models their interactions and allows the user to extract information of interest. To simulate an experiment, the user must define the geometry, physics processes and data handling during tracking. Critical components of the Geant4 simulation are described below. These simulations were used to convert the measured reaction rates to neutron source strengths.

Geometry

Each experimental geometry was modeled in detail, including the copper and lead shielding, HPGe, aluminum and acrylic plates, and neutron source. Neutrons were generated isotropically from positions distributed uniformly within the central powder of the AmBe geometry. The energies of the neutrons were drawn from the distribution in Figure [\ref=fig:CrossSections].

Physics

Within Geant version 4.10.0, the "Standard Electromagnetic" package was used to handle the e- and γ ray transport and interactions. The "Radioactive Decay" physics list was used to model the decay of the isotopes generated through neutron interactions. The "QGSP_BIC_HP" hadronic physics list uses the "High Precision" neutron cross sections to handle the neutron transport and reactions in the nominal 0-10 MeV energy range. The inelastic scattering process was overridden to produce excited aluminum atoms which were then handled by the radioactive decay processes to produce γ rays. This procedure resulted in γ ray spectra consistent in peak width and location with measured spectra.

Data Handling

An event is defined as the generation of one neutron along with all of the secondary particles it produces along its trajectory through the simulated experimental geometry. Several different values are extracted and recorded during each of the events. Most importantly, the total energy deposited in the HPGe (primarily from γ rays) for each neutron generated is recorded.

10 neutrons (Nsimulated) were simulated for each experimental geometry. A γ ray spectrum was created by summing over the total energy deposited in each event. The simulated spectra were handled exactly as the background-subtracted measured spectra in the analysis. Integrating under the peaks (Npeak) in these simulated spectra, the neutron source strength (An) was determined from the measured data as:

[formula]

The ratio Npeak / Nsimulated represents the absolute system efficiency, which ranged from 1.57-4.94, depending on the reaction.

Results and Discussion

Fast Neutron Reactions

The Al(n,n') reaction, which dominates in the fast neutron regime, was observed when the aluminum disk was present. The 844 keV and 1015 keV peaks, corresponding to the 1 and 2 energy level transitions of Al, are shown in Figure [\ref=fig:843_1014Spectrum] and are compared to the simulation. The peak corresponding to the 3 energy level transition at 2212 keV was also observed in the data at a much lower activity. The negative peaks observed in the measured spectrum result from the background subtraction, where the removal of material results in less attenuation of background peaks.

The Al(n,p) reaction contributes to the 844 keV and 1015 keV peaks. Simulations showed that this contribution is small (2.0%-3.0% for the different geometries). This contribution is taken into account in the subsequent analysis.

From simulated timing profiles, the fast neutron reactions occur <  10 ns after neutron emission. For AmBe sources, it is expected that a fraction of the time (0.575 ±   0.028) a 4483 keV γ ray is emitted along with the neutron[\cite=GammaRatio]. This γ ray may also deposit energy in the HPGe in time coincidence with the aluminum γ rays. The correction to the total efficiency was determined by simulating this γ ray.

Thermal Neutron Reactions

Peaks associated with the Al(n,γ) and H(n,γ) reactions were observed for experimental geometries 3-7. Figure [\ref=fig:1778SpectrumCompare] illustrates these results and also serves as a demonstration of the effectiveness of acrylic as a neutron moderator.

The H(n,γ) 2225 keV peak was seen in all spectra from all geometries with acrylic. A peak from geometry 7 is shown in Figure [\ref=fig:2224Spectrum]. The 4483 keV γ ray correction was negligible for thermal reactions as the approximate time between the H(n,γ) and Al(n,γ) reactions and neutron emission of .17ex10-50 [formula]s made these separate detections in the HPGe from the γ rays emitted directly from the AmBe source.

Activity Determination

A neutron source activity was calculated for each reaction observed in each geometry. In regards to the Al(n,n'), where multiple peaks were observed, only the 1015 keV peak was used for activity calculations. From the full system efficiencies determined by the simulations, the neutron source activities were calculated from Equations [\ref=eq:reaction_activity] and [\ref=eq:neutron_activity]. The results are shown in Figure [\ref=fig:ActivityPlot]. A best fit to these data yields a neutron activity of 305.6 ±   4.9 n/s.

Systematics

A further series of measurements were performed to quantify the level of systematic uncertainty. One dominant systematic uncertainty was the placement of the different targets and neutron source with respect to the HPGe. For an uncertainty in radial position of 5 mm from nominal centre, the corresponding uncertainty in neutron source strength ranged from 5.3%-19.1% across the geometries for the Al(n,γ) reaction. Similarly, for the Al(n,n') and H(n,γ) reaction these ranges were 1.8%-3.3% and 5.9%-6.2%, respectively.

Further evaluation quantified the uncertainty resulting from our knowledge of the neutron source spectrum. Small shifts (up to 10%) were added to different parts of the source spectrum with simulations being repeated. The subsequent effect was seen to be non-negligible (0.7%-2.9%). The total uncertainties attributed to these systematic effects are included along with the statistical uncertainties in Figure [\ref=fig:ActivityPlot].

Sensitivity

For each peak measured in all geometries, the minimum detectable activity (MDA) was determined from the corresponding background measurements. From the aluminum reactions, geometry 1 was observed to have the lowest MDA (specifically from the Al(n,n') 1015 keV reaction). This activity corresponds to a neutron source activity of 9.53 ±   0.36 n/s. Similarly for acrylic, geometry 7 had the lowest MDA, which corresponds to a neutron activity of 4.20 ±   0.30 n/s. This sensitivity is well below the measured neutron activity of the AmBe source.

Verification

The neutron activity was also determined by directly measuring the 4483 keV γ ray emitted by the source. This method relies on the gamma to neutron ratio (0.575 ±   0.028) [\cite=GammaRatio]. To obtain a full-peak detection efficiency, the same simulation program was used. Figure [\ref=fig:4438Spectrum] compares the measured and simulated spectra. The neutron activity of the source was determined to be 305.0 ±   16.1 n/s, in good agreement with the results of Section [\ref=sec:activity].

Conclusions

A method was created to determine the strength of a weak neutron source using a HPGe detector. Three different reactions in both the thermal and fast neutron regimes were used to determine the neutron activity of an AmBe source. The independently-determined activities show consistency and result in a neutron activity of 305.6 ±   4.9 n/s. The neutron activity determined using a measurement of the 4483 keV γ ray from the AmBe source directly yielded an activity of 305.0 ±   16.1 n/s.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Canada Foundation for Innovation, Alberta Innovates - Technology Futures, Alberta Innovation & Advanced Education, and the Killam Trust.