Updating the Historical Sunspot Record

The Sunspot Record(s!)

The Sunspot Record goes back 400 years and is the basis for many reconstructions of solar parameters (e.g. TSI), but, how good is it? And can we agree on which one (Wolf Number, International Number, 'Boulder' Number, Group Number, ...)? Are the old values good? Are the new ones? And what is a 'good' or 'correct' Sunspot Number anyway?

Johann Rudolf [\citet=wo1859] defined his Relative Sunspot Number, taking into account both individual spots and their appearance in distinct groups (what we today call 'active regions'), as RW = 10  Groups + Spots. Wolf started his own observations in 1849 and assembled observations from earlier observers back to 1749 and beyond (Figure 1).

As is clear, the earlier values were subsequently adjusted (upwards) as Wolf were struggling with the difficulty of bringing different observers onto the same 'scale', compensating for telescope size, counting method, acuity, seeing, and personal bias.

Wolf published several versions of his celebrated Relative Sunspot Numbers based on data gathered from many observers from both before and during Wolf's own lifetime (Figure 2). How to 'harmonize' data from different observers?

Wolf's Elegant Solution

A current system in the ionospheric E-layer is created and maintained by solar UV radiation (Figure 3). The current has a magnetic field of its own which is readily observed on the ground even with 18th Century technology. This variation was, in fact, discovered in 1722 by George [\citet=gr1724] as a regular variation of typically 10 arc minutes during each day of the angle (called the Declination today) a compass needle makes with true North. The amplitude (rD) of this variation is an excellent proxy for solar UV.

[\citet=wo1859] discovered that this amplitude has a strong linear relationship with his newly defined Relative Number, RW: rD = a + b  RW and used the relationship to calibrate the sunspot number on a yearly basis (Figure 4).

Wolf made two overall major calibration changes based on rD:

By comparing sunspot numbers (SSN) reported by other observers with his own, Wolf introduced a scale factor to compensate for the differences: SSN = kW(10  Groups + Spots).

The Group Sunspot Number

[\citet=hs1998] proposed basing the Sunspot number solely on the number of groups reported by the observers: GSN  =  12  Groups. The calibration constant was used to make the value of the GSN comparable to the modern Sunspot Number. However, the number of sunspot groups is also observer dependent (Figure 5), by up to a factor of two or more, so an observer-dependent adjustment factor is also needed: GSN = 12  kG  Groups.

So, the conceptually cleaner GSN also needs adjustment and 'bridges' from one observer to the next, and the next, etc, lacking the 'absolute' calibration afforded by another physical observable. This may lead to a possibly spurious secular change (Figure 6).

Sunspot Number Relationship with Diurnal Range

Extensive datasets exist ([\citet=sc1909]) from the 'Magnetic Crusade' in the 1840s and for times after the First Polar Year 1882 (Figure 7).

As the current flows along meridians on the morning and evening sides, the magnetic deflection is along latitude circles and the magnitude in force units (nT) is largely constant from station to station over a wide latitude range (20deg-60deg). From the observed values of rD and of the Horizontal component, H, the range in force units, rY, is readily calculated as shown. Wolf didn't know that the important parameter is rY and not rD, so he had to contend with regression coefficients that varied from station to station and with time. While not a serious problem once you know why, this variation nevertheless weakened other researchers' confidence in Wolf's procedure.

As shown in Figure 8, after ~  1882 the GSN (pink) and the SSN (blue) have the same relation with the range of geomagnetic variation and cluster neatly along a common regression line, also found for SSN for stations regardless of time interval.

If we add the GSN averages (red diamonds) for stations before 1850, we find that they all fall well below the regression line for stations after 1880 (Figure 9).

If the diurnal range, rY, is a satisfactory measure of the kind of solar activity we believe the sunspot should be a proxy for, then the above analysis would suggest that the Group Sunspot Number should be increased by a factor of 1.4 sometime before ~  1880, removing most of the discrepancy between the two sunspot number series.

Ratio of Wolf SSN and Group Sunspot Number

It is instructive to plot the ratio of the Wolf number and the Group number (omitting years where either is close to zero). Figure 10 shows that with the above adjustment by a factor of 1.4 before ~  1880, the ratio seems to be near unity, with an expected large noise component early on. A discontinuity in 1945 when Max Waldmeier took over production of the Zürich Sunspot Number is apparent. Alfred Wolfer became Wolf's assistant around 1880 and began to influence the 'Wolf' number from then on.

Wolf did not count pores and the smallest spots. His assistant (and successor) Alfred Wolfer disagreed and argued that all visible pores and spots, no matter how small, should be counted, and of course won the argument by staying longer on the right side of the grass. He used the correction factor, kW = 0.6, to bring his counts into conformance with Wolf's. There is some confusion about kW being a 'personal' factor or not. As Wolfer used it, kW compensates for a difference in what is counted, rather than a difference in telescope, seeing, etc. Since the number of groups is rarely influenced by a change in counting the smallest spots, the defining equation should perhaps better have been SSN = 10  Groups + κ  Spots, but this is now probably too late to change.

Geomagnetic Ranges; the Waldmeier Discontinuity, I

[\citet=fr2005] comments on the change of observers in Zürich in 1945 and writes: "The new observer-team was thus relatively inexperienced" and "Waldmeier himself feared that his scale factor could vary". We now know that his fear was not unfounded. Waldmeier's counts are 22% higher than Wolfer and Brunner's, for the same amplitude of the Diurnal Geomagnetic Variation (Figure 11). This is close to the size of the discontinuity deduced from Figure 10. As SIDC took pains to maintain continuity with Waldmeier, the jump carries over to modern SSN values.

The RGO Sunspot Area Series; the Waldmeier Discontinuity, II

There is a strong correlation (with zero offset) between the Sunspot area (SA) and RZ = (1 / r)SA0.775. The ratio r = SA0.775 / RZ is observer dependent. Histograms of the ratio values indicate that Waldmeier's RZ values are a factor of 3.39/2.88 = 1.18 too high (Figure 12), or 18%.

CaK Spectroheliograms; the Waldmeier Discontinuity, III

From ~  40,000 CaK spectroheliograms from the 60-foot tower at Mount Wilson between 1915 and 1985 a daily index of the fractional area of the visible solar disk occupied by plages and active network has been constructed [\citet=be2008]. Monthly averages of this index are strongly correlated with the sunspot number. The relationship is not linear, but can be represented by the equation: RZ  =  1.29 using data from 1915-1945, i.e. the pre-Waldmeier era. The SSN reported by Waldmeier is ~  20% higher than that calculated from CaK using the above pre-Waldmeier relation, as can be seen in Figure 13. [\citet=fo1998] reports a similar result.

Ionospheric Critical Frequency; the Waldmeier Discontinuity, IV

The value of the Ionospheric Critical Frequency foF2 depends strongly on solar activity ([\citet=ph1948]) and is perhaps the parameter with the clearest response to solar activity. The slope of the correlation changed 24% between solar cycles 17 and 18 when Waldmeier took over, corresponding to a 24% higher SSN after 1945 than that which would be expected from the foF2 relation. Based on these several lines of independent evidence there seems little doubt that Waldmeier introduced a spurious increase of the Zürich sunspot number of that magnitude.

Geomagnetic Range is an Excellent Proxy for F10.7 Radio Flux

Wolf's linear relationship (on which the calibration hangs) is completely vindicated by modern data using the F10.7 cm flux as a measure for general solar activity. The coefficient of determination R2 is in excess of 0.98 for yearly averages of the flux (itself a proxy for solar UV) and the amplitude of the ensuing geomagnetic diurnal variation (Figure 14). This establishes that Wolf's procedure and calibration are physically sound and precise enough to be applicable.

Conclusion

Modern data shows that the diurnal range of the geomagnetic variation is an extremely good proxy for the solar microwave flux. To the extent that we take the flux to be a measure of general solar activity of which the sunspot number was meant to be an indicator, we argue that Wolf's calibration makes his sunspot series essentially an equivalent F10.7 series. Accepting the soundness of Wolf's procedure and correcting for the Waldmeier discontinuity (+20%) lead to a picture of solar activity with but little difference between activity levels in the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries (Figure 15).