Fluctuation-induced forces in granular mixtures of rods and spheres

Introduction

Fluctuation-induced forces are ubiquitous in nature, from London dispersive forces to Casimir forces. London deduced in 1930 [\cite=London1930] and then in 1937 [\cite=London1937] a general theory of molecular forces in which the instantaneous intensity of a molecular dipole induced by quantum fluctuations induces a dipole in a neighboring molecule, through a fluctuating (but not radiating) electric field. The energy of the zero-point motion cannot be dissipated through radiation. Instead, it enables a dipolar interaction with the instantaneous dipole induced on their neighbors. This interaction increases as the strength of the fluctuating dipole becomes stronger, characteristic of a fluctuation-induced force. From then on, van der Waals and London dispersive forces have become the paradigm of fluctuation-induced forces and have been universally identified, from molecular systems up to the main forces responsible of primordial accretion and stability of granular asteroids [\cite=Scheeres2010].

On the other hand, when Casimir predicted in 1948 the attraction between two flat conducting surfaces, due to quantum fluctuations of the zero field of vacuum, a thorough experimental search was initiated [\cite=Casimir1948]. Four decades later, Lamoreaux [\cite=Lamoreaux1997] conclusively demonstrated for the first time the Casimir effect. Subsequently, it was theorized by Fisher and de Gennes [\cite=Fisher1978] that substituting electromagnetic quantum fluctuations for density fluctuations of the medium (for instance, in a binary mixture close to the critical point) would lead to an analogous phenomenon, called from then on the critical Casimir effect. This was directly measured by Hertlein, by means of frustrated total internal reflection microscopy techniques [\cite=Hertlein2008]. More recently, Reza [\cite=RezaShaebani2012], following the predictions made by Brito of a granular Casimir effect [\cite=Brito2007] [\cite=Cattuto2006] [\cite=Brito2007a], found numerically a non-additive character of such granular Casimir forces, not yet observed experimentally. Moreover, long-range attractive forces have been observed among large intruders within granular media, but they were not associated with Casimir forces [\cite=Sanders2006] [\cite=Zuriguel2005].

On Brownian systems, Asakura and Oosawa investigated the role of small colloids in the aggregation of larger ones and developed a theory to describe the attraction between large particles due to depletion of small particles within the gap in between the larger ones [\cite=Oosawa1954]. For this reason, these forces are sometimes called depletion forces, but are referred as well as excluded volume forces. They are behind the entropically driven ordering produced in colloids by adding some depleting agent (usually a polymer or a macromolecule). Depletion forces have been broadly investigated at colloidal [\cite=Lekkerkerker2011] and even at granular scales [\cite=Bose2005] [\cite=Melby2007] [\cite=Sanders2004] [\cite=Duran1998] [\cite=Galanis2010]. Furthermore, this depletion forces can produce a layering effect at molecular or colloidal scales [\cite=Israelachvili1983], not yet observed in granular materials [\cite=Kruppa2012].

Both Casimir and depletion forces share in common that there exists a region in between large objects, immersed in a sea of small fluctuating entities, that becomes depleted from momentum transfer coming from such tiny entities (being electromagnetic, mechanical or of some other nature). This pressure imbalance from the interior and the exterior region of the large structures give rise to the effective attraction.

In this paper, we report a novel fluctuation-induced attraction, as well as depletion forces between granular rod-like particles immersed in a two-dimensional gas of spheres. Subtle differences make possible to discern between these two attractive interactions, since both effects are coupled and are enhanced by each other.

Experiments

A granular mixture of brass rods (2.5 cm in length and 3.3 mm in diameter) and steel spheres of the same diameter than rods is vertically shaken, using a modal shaker fed with a sinusoidal signal of frequency 60 Hz and amplitude of 0.24 mm (Γ = 3.5 in most experiments, except where otherwise indicated), on top of a flat horizontal plate. At the edge of the plate, close to the vertical confining wall, steel beads were embedded into the floor down to half of their diameter, in order to transfer horizontal momentum to the rods and beads, avoiding this way fringe effects. Digital video (Red Lake Motion Meter camera, 500 fps) is recorded from above and each particle's position is determined as it evolves. Starting from a configuration in which rods are homogeneously distributed on the plate (Fig. [\ref=System]a), the evolution of rods is recorded and analyzed a posteriori, by means of an ImageJ software routine.

The mixture evolves from a homogeneous distribution of rods, set initially by hand, towards islands of aggregated rods that stick together laterally, forming dimers, trimers or polymers. The force allowing dimer formation is the depletion force originated by the fact that if two rods meet each other laterally, the region in between them is depleted of spheres and therefore, momentum is not transfered to the rods from this "interior" region, unbalancing the momentum transfer produced from the spheres outside. In Fig. [\ref=System]a to c, typical initial, intermediate (after 15 minutes) and final (after 30 minutes) configurations are shown respectively.

As can be seen in Fig. [\ref=System]b, a phase separation occurs and several aggregates form after the experiment starts. The two new phases are constituted by a gas of spheres with just few rods diluted in it and several islands of aggregates of parallel rods. These aggregates can be of two, three or more parallel rods in close contact or two parallel rods sandwiching a chain (or even two lines) of spheres in between. Two representative examples of such configurations are highlighted on the picture. The rods stuck together in close contact will be referred as "depletion aggregates", while the configuration of sandwiched spheres will be called a "Fluctuation-Induced Aggregate (FIA)" (see Fig.[\ref=FIAS]). The main difference between both kinds of aggregates resides in the fact that the region in between two successive parallel rods is depleted or not of roaming spheres.

At a first glance, one can attribute the formation of FIA configurations to depletion forces as well. However, the region in between rods is not depleted from spheres. Instead, a closer analysis reveals that the density of spheres per unit area is always higher in the interior region (ni = 9.5 particles/cm2) than it is outside the rods (no = 7.7 particles/cm2). This should lead, in principle, to a higher "osmotic" pressure from inside the configuration that would produce an effective force pushing apart the rods. This, in turn, should be observed as an effective repulsion of rods, whenever a set of spheres are trapped in between them, making the observed configuration unstable. Instead, these structures are very likely to be produced and are stable enough to subsist in stationary state during the whole experiment once formed (see red line of Fig. [\ref=AL] at 30 minutes), indicating a significant attraction between rods in such a strongly fluctuating medium.

Discussion

The mechanism behind the stability of FIA configurations can be unveiled by means of studying the velocity distributions of spherical particles inside and outside such structures. This was done by zooming-in close to a single FIA and measuring the displacements of the spherical particles among consecutive frames.

In Fig. [\ref=Distrib], we show comparatively the resulting velocity distributions for particles sandwiched between rods and for particles in the surrounding gas. For this last case, we considered all those particles in the field of view, including those particles next to the rods and excluding those in between them. We included such spheres because although the nearest neighbors to the rod present a lower velocity profile, they act as momentum transmitters from the spheres situated in the bulk.

A clear suppression of the perpendicular component of the motion is found for those particles trapped between rods, showing that their corresponding kinematic modes are inhibited in a similar way to that occurring with electromagnetic modes within the interior region defined by the conducting plates in the quantum-mechanical Casimir effect. In that case, the quantization of modes required by the boundary conditions imposed by the conducting plates shaves the electromagnetic field spectrum within the interior region, making it discrete, but it does not affect the zero-point fluctuating field spectrum outside the plates. Such conditions produce an imbalance of radiation pressure that exerts a net attractive force between the conducting plates. Analogously, the particles sandwiched between rods are less likely to acquire momentum in the direction perpendicular to the confining rods, and are only prompted to acquiring momentum from the plate in the vertical direction and along the rods, due to the constriction imposed to the spheres by the much more massive intruders (rods).

This mechanical inhibition of momentum acquisition perpendicular to the rods is because spherical particles that eventually find themselves in between two rods will suffer a high number of collisions per unit time against the caging rods. This phenomenon, called "clustering" by Goldhirsh [\cite=Goldhirsch1993], is closely related to the inelastic collapse previously discovered in silico by Shida and Kawai [\cite=Shida1989]. This clustering cannot be measured directly in our experiments, due to spatial and temporal resolution limitations. However, by means of measuring the average rod-rod distance, the average displacement perpendicular to the rods, [formula] (= 0.55  ±  0.19 mm), can be easily inferred and thus, the number of collisions per unit time that spheres perform inside a FIA. For doing so, we have fitted the perpendicular distribution function of trapped spheres (Fig. [\ref=Distrib]) with a Gaussian function and used the standard deviation of such fitting curve. Dividing by the rod-rod mean distance, the collision rate is obtained (68.7  ±  1.8 s- 1). On the other hand, the average collision rate among spheres outside FIAs is obtained using the standard deviation of the perpendicular component of the velocity outside and dividing by the mean free path [formula] (= 1.8 mm). In this case, the collision rate turns out to be 38.3  ±  1.1 s- 1, almost half (56%) the rate of that inside the FIA.

The power exerted on a rod by colliding particles inside (outside) is proportional to the average kinetic energy of the particles times the number of particles that collide in a unit time. This last number can easily be evaluated by taking the product of the surface density of particles and the root mean squared velocity in the direction perpendicular to the rods times the rod length. The number of collisions per unit length inside and outside are the densities ni or no times the mean square velocities inside or outside; i.e. ni〈v2i〉1 / 2 and no〈v2o〉1 / 2. Consequently, the power exerted on the inner and the outer walls is given respectively by

[formula]

[formula]

where ε is the sphere-rod restitution coefficient, L is the length of the rods and m is the mass of one sphere. The ratio of these quantities in our case is 4.9. On the other hand, the force exerted on the rod from either the inside or the outside is given by this power divided by the velocity the rod acquires during the collision. In turn, this last velocity is a fraction of the spheres velocity, because of the difference of masses and the restitution coefficient. Therefore, there will be a net attraction that grows linearly with the mean squared velocity of particles in the gassy phase. In spite of the fact that in the inner region there is larger number of collisions per unit time and a larger density of particles per unit area (contrary to depletion mechanisms), fluctuations inside are so strongly suppressed that a net positive pressure from the outside develops. This confirms that the fluctuation-induced attraction is driven by a clustering mechanism.

As stated above, for equal velocity distributions inside and outside the pair of rods, the larger number density of trapped particles within the couple of confining rods with respect to the surrounding gas would induce an effective repulsive force between the rods, making the FIA configuration unlikely. Furthermore, one can expect that the stability of such configuration would decrease as the intensity of fluctuations in the surrounding gas of spheres is increased, since the rods as well are subjected to these velocity fluctuations, and consequently, they would have increased translational and rotational diffusion. It should be remarked that this fluctuation-induced interaction behaves contrary to the theoretically predicted granular Casimir forces described by Brito and Cattuto [\cite=Brito2007] [\cite=Cattuto2006] who found mainly repulsive forces. This implies that the force between rods, and thus the stability of the aggregates, should increase as the shaking strength [formula] does for attractive Casimir forces, and decreases for repulsive ones depending on the general trend of the gas state equation.

The relationship among the granular Casimir force per unit area and the fluctuation intensity (in our case, the shaking acceleration) for a system of two large immobile intruders in a sea of smaller moving spheres can be expressed in the form [\cite=Brito2007]:

[formula]

where l = k0Lx is a reduced distance with respect to the separation between plates Lx, and k0 a characteristic length of the system. D is the diffusion coefficient and p and n are the pressure exerted by the particles and the number density of particles respectively. Thus, the Casimir force will grow linearly with [formula] and the interaction will be repulsive or attractive depending on the positive or negative sign respectively of the second derivative of the pressure with respect to density. In this sense, further investigation is required in order to determine the behavior of pressure as a function of density for our quasi 2D granular gas and how this new aggregation mechanism could be related to Casimir forces even though our FIAs barely satisfy the required geometric conditions imposed by the continuous density field hypothesis (distance between intruders larger than the UV cut-off length) made in deriving granular Casimir forces [\cite=Brito2007] [\cite=Cattuto2006].

The characteristic dependence of fluctuation-induced forces with fluctuation intensity (v.g. Eq. [\ref=Press]) was corroborated indirectly by increasing the shaking amplitude and measuring the stability (that is, the survival times) of a single FIA configuration set as the initial condition. Twenty measurements were made for each value of shaking amplitude. A FIA is considered broken when the orthogonal distance from one extreme to the other rod is longer than three diameters (two spheres fit within) and when both rods are not parallel anymore. Double lines of spheres trapped among rods are not taken into account for simplicity, due to their scarcity. The resulting survival time is shown in Fig. [\ref=Times] as a function of the dimensionless acceleration Γ. It is worth to note that isolated depletion dimers could last tens of minutes or even more, giving an idea of how much more stable they are in comparison with fluctuation-induced aggregates.

Entropically driven ordering of rods is due to the fact that rods in contact have smaller excluded area than separated rods. In other words, as rods stick together in close contact, the spheres have a larger area to roam and consequently, they increase the number of possible configurations and the whole entropy of the system. Here, the liberated area is the excluded areas of two independent rods minus that of two rods in contact.

For purposes of counting the effect of FIAs in increasing the area available for roaming, just the overlapped area of spheres within two rods in a FIA configuration is taken into account. In Fig. [\ref=AL], liberated area due to depletion, FIAs structures, and both mechanisms is plotted as a function of time, for an area fraction coverage of 0.46, including 50 rods. In the same figure, dashed lines represent a fitting, corresponding to a simple model in which the number of depletion or FIA pairs formed per unit time is proportional to the number of available rods and the strength of the interaction. Under these assumptions, we have fitted to these previous curves the following function of time for liberated area AL:

[formula]

where A0 is the asymptotic liberated area and κ is the reciprocal of a characteristic time in which aggregation phenomenon takes places, both of which are left as fitting parameters.

The characteristic times (κ- 1) determining the kinetics of aggregation should be proportional to the interaction strength, giving rise to faster aggregation kinetics with increasing shaking force. In our case, the ratio of these parameters for depletion and fluctuation-induced interaction gave a value of 3.0. Different values with those obtained by studying the aggregation kinetics or the dynamics of particles colliding from the interior or exterior regions can be explained, since the FIAs can still provide rods to form depletion pairs and because FIAs configurations are stuck within depletion condensates by dynamic arrest, thus coupling both aggregation kinetic mechanisms. Survival times can be understood as a measurement of disassociation times for FIAs, and the characteristic time for these processes should grow linearly for increasing interaction strength, in agreement with our simple model of aggregation proposed above.

It is worth to recall that in the theoretical framework developed by Brito, the derivation of granular Casimir force requires the assumption of a continuous medium, in which granularity enters just as an input flow of energy (random kicks) and a heat output (dissipation). Furthermore, an "ultraviolet cut-off" is needed (for a wavenumber of [formula], where a is the particle diameter), in order to avoid diverging density of modes. This imposes a lower bound of validity of the model, beyond which the continuum differential equations become meaningless, since the granularity of the medium becomes evident. Our experiments reveal the momentum transfer in a microscopic level, just at the limit of applicability of Brito's mesoscopic model (in our case, [formula], which is the minimum possible separation of rods in a FIA). However, a suppression or fluctuation reduction of the velocity field maximum amplitude by confinement of the few grains trapped between the intruders is what allows us to interpret these configurations as induced by fluctuations that produce an effective attractive force without necessity of invoking a mesoscopic or continuum model.

These forces we observe are attractive since, increasing the particle density will produce first an increase in pressure (there is a higher probability of lateral collisions amongst grains), but further increase in particle density will lead to a decreasing lateral pressure exerted by our gas, due to a clustering instability [\cite=Goldhirsch1993]. In other words, our quasi-2D system has a ∂2p / ∂n2 < 0, which, following Brito's derivation, would lead to an attractive force. Brito's prediction yielded a repulsive force in most cases, since this model does not take into account the effect of clustering since their gas is modeled with a constant restitution coefficient (independent of the velocity at collision). At the light of Brito's theoretical framework but considering the intrinsic limitations described above, this clustering instability could be provoking an attractive force, in agreement with the observations of Bordallo et al. [\cite=Bordallo-Favela2009] of long range correlations associated to attractive effective potentials among inelastic particles. In other words, an extension of Brito's model relaxing the continuity assumption of the density but keeping flux constrictions imposed by intruders is needed in order to discern if the fluctuation-induced attraction reported here can be related to granular Casimir forces at this "microscopic level", below the ultraviolet cut-off. Since in our case: (1) long range correlations among fluctuating fields, (2) confinement of fluctuations due to the intruders, (3) a non monotonic compressibility, and (4) an increasing strength of the attraction with the fluctuation intensity are present, an underlying mechanical Casimir attraction mechanism is suggested.

Furthermore, an analogous of the wetting and layering phenomenon that occurs for molecular and colloidal systems [\cite=Israelachvili1983], appears in our experiments. In Fig. [\ref=Stack], two sets of 20 superimposed pictures taken at intervals of 20 ms show this granular wetting only when the confining vertical wall is smooth; this layering does not appear when the edge have spheres embedded at the bottom plate. In Fig. [\ref=Stack]a, a typical FIA pair located at the center of the plate is depicted. In this picture, the suppression of motion perpendicular to the rods for the trapped particles can clearly be distinguished, as well as a gradient of mobility from the external surface of the rod towards the bulk of the gassy phase. Such effect arises due to the zero-flux boundary condition imposed by the rods or cell walls, and represents the same mechanismo that leads to FIA formation. In Fig. [\ref=Stack]b, the superimposed pictures were taken close to the border of the plate (smooth base and lateral wall), strikingly showing the layering and the increasing mobility of particle towards the plate center. This granular wetting can be attributed to clustering itself or to a vertical guidance of bouncing particles trapped between the gas and the container's wall, or both.

Conclusions

We have investigated a granular two-dimensional gas composed of a mixture of inelastic rods and spheres in which segregation of rods proceeds, via the increase in entropy by excluded area reduction. Area is liberated when two or more rods join side to side or when fluctuation-induced aggregates are created. Besides, these FIA structures suppress, for the spheres trapped within, their ability of acquiring momentum in the direction perpendicular to the rods by a mechanism of clustering, provoking a pressure imbalance between the interior and the exterior region of the configuration. This, in turn, leads to an effective net attraction among rods, which represents a novel attraction force between intruders, different from an excluded-volume force. This is shown through velocity distributions in direction parallel and perpendicular to the rods for spheres within and without the FIA configuration and by measuring the number density of particles inside and outside the aggregates. Finally, survival times grow linearly with the shaking amplitude supporting the identification of these structures as caused by a close relative to the granular Casimir effect previously predicted and not yet observed.

Ubiquity of fluctuation-induced forces in non-equilibrium systems, in particular in granular materials, could lead us to understand aggregation and segregation mechanisms better, from laboratory or industrial, up to even planetary and cosmological scales.