Comment on Article by Berger, Bernardo, and Sun

It is our distinct pleasure to comment on a very thought provoking paper, and we first congratulate the Authors for this new masterly contribution in the field of objective priors.

The main goal of the paper is to find a multi-purpose objective prior for a model that should be used by different researchers with varying goals, with the consequence that no single parameter or parametric function can be identified as a parameter of interest. In this situation, the most popular approaches either fail or, as in the case of the reference prior algorithm, they cannot be used.

Three general methods are discussed by the Authors. The first one is limited to a number of particular situations where the reference prior is the same for all quantities of interest: this case is not of much concern since a natural solution exists. The second method is based on the reference prior approach: one looks for the prior which produces the marginal posteriors for the quantities of interest which are closer - in some sense - to the marginal reference posteriors. Whereas this method is perfectly reasonable, the final result will depend on the particular set of the quantities of interest considered and it cannot be considered as the "overall" objective prior. The third method is based on a hierarchical representation of the model, when it is available. It shifts the problem of determining an objective prior to an upper level of the hierarchy, where the impact of the prior might be less serious.

We believe that the latter method is superior to the others because

it is compatible with a predictive approach where all the parameters are nuisance parameters and there is no particular quantity of interest; however, one should be careful here: if the quantity of interest is, for example, the posterior predictive mean

[formula]

of a future observation - and not the entire predictive density - then a parameter of interest actually does exist!

it is clearly superior to Method 2, especially when the model is used repeatedly by different people which are interested in different sets of parameters.

In terms of prediction, it would be worth discussing the proposal of [\cite=Datta00].

In this contribution, we will briefly consider the multinomial example, and provide some comments on the concept of prior averaging.

The multinomial model in the sparse case

This is a very interesting problem. Jeffreys' prior allocates a weight of 1 / 2 to each original component of the vector [formula]. This is too much when m is large compared to the sample size n and the distribution is very sparse. This suggests that the prior mass should be adequately spread on the parameter space in such a way that each cell has a negligible prior mean, especially when compared with the weight of the data.

In the multinomial case, the prior weight (expressed as the sum of the hyper-parameters of the Dirichlet prior) is equal to m / 2 for the Jeffreys' prior, while in the hierarchical approach, arising from a Dirichlet[formula] hyper-prior, it is a random quantity v = ma with density given by expression (25) of the paper, at least in the case of an infinite m. Several numerical computations, with different values of n and r0 (i.e., the number of non-empty cells), show that the mode and the median of v are rarely larger than 2, so the hierarchical approach automatically accounts for the sparsity and the corresponding marginal posteriors are dramatically different from those arising from the use of Jeffreys' prior.

There are many ways in which this problem can be handled. If we transform it to a multiple testing problem, that is, for each cell i we test

[formula]

the problem can be rephrased as that of finding an ad-hoc prior, just like in the sparse normal problem, which is well studied in literature, see, for example, [\cite=scott]. The two problems are similar but not identical: here we do not necessarily observe data for each cell, and the difficulties associated with this discrete version of the problem are even greater since the values of the θi's will affect the standard deviation of the cells, not only the means.

From a testing perspective there is also another interesting connection: the Authors propose to add - as a prior weight - something close to 1 / m to each cell. So the total weight of the prior will be approximately one. This reminds us of the unit prior information of [\cite=kw].

The sparse multinomial case is also of theoretical interest because it represents a bridge between parametric and non-parametric models, when the number of cells goes to infinity.

Our personal view of the example is close to that of the Authors, although it is not of great surprise that the Jeffreys' prior does not clearly discriminate between observed and non-observed cells, when n is so small compared to m. In other words, this is too much to ask of the prior. When n is as small as 3, and the number of parameters is about 1000, it is hopeless to find a good automatic objective prior and some external guidance (in this case, the choice of a "proper" prior within the Dirichlet class) seems unavoidable.

More interesting is the fact that the hierarchical prior depends on m and n only through their ratio: this is actually what one would expect.

We have also considered a variant of the multinomial example. In particular, we have considered the case when the multinomial likelihood can be rephrased as one arising from a sample of m independent Poisson random variables with mean vector ([formula] and then setting [formula]. Doing the usual reference prior calculations here, we ended up with the same conclusions as if we have used the standard Jeffreys' Beta prior (1 / 2,1 / 2) for the θi's. We wonder how to get the same result (weights ≈  m- 1 for the cells) in this alternative perspective. It is very likely that this can be obtained by assuming independent gamma priors with shape parameter a and scale parameter β for the ψj. If the "nuisance" scale parameter β is eliminated by conditioning on the total counts, we end up with the same conclusion. However, the rationale behind this last choice is - again - only pragmatic.

A related issue is the ordered multinomial example in 2.1.2. Here the overall prior for any of the parameters [formula] is the product of independent Beta(1 / 2,1 / 2): what happens for large m? Is the overall prior still a sensible prior or should we take into account this problem?

A comment on geometric average of priors

Consider the following divergence function

[formula]

where [formula] are suitable constants adding to 1, and πi(θ) may be a suitable objective prior when one is interested in one of a given set of m parametric functions. The above function is a weighted average Kullback-Leibler divergence between a global prior and the marginal priors we would like to use in the case we were interested in a single parametric function ti(θ), [formula] Note that

[formula]

By Jensen's inequality, d(η) will be minimized with respect to η if [formula] is a degenerate function. This leads to the geometric mean prior

[formula]

Usually, the component priors πi(θ)'s are improper, which in turn may also make πG(θ) an improper prior. The authors indicated that the geometric mean prior is preferable to the arithmetic mean prior since one or more of the component priors πi may be improper, and the arithmetic mean posterior may be highly influenced by one or a few component posteriors. Indeed, for any arbitrary positive constant ci, ciπi(θ) is as much an objective prior as πi(θ) is. While the posterior propriety of the arithmetic mean prior is an immediate consequence of the propriety of the component posteriors, the same is not so obvious for the geometric mean prior. However, the following lemma shows that the posterior corresponding to πG(θ) will be proper provided that each component prior πi(θ) generates a proper posterior.

For two prior densities μ(θ) and ν(θ), if

[formula]

then, for any α∈(0,1),

[formula]

where [formula] denotes the joint density of data [formula] corresponding to the parameter value θ.

By Hölder's inequality, it follows that

[formula]

Thus μ(θ)αν(θ)1 - α generates a proper posterior density for the given data [formula].

By repeated use of this lemma, the propriety of the posterior based on the geometric prior πG(θ) easily follows.

An anecdote

While preparing the present comments one of the authors attended a seminar on applied probability where the following situation was presented. In a small village, there is a chief and several shepherds. Each shepherd runs a flock of sheeps. The chief knows that the ground of their village is going to become parched so the shepherds have to move away. All the roads starting from the village - but one - are full of hungry wolves. The chief has his own probability distribution about which is the safe road. If the chief communicates his/her information to the shepherds, it is very likely that all of them would choose the same road. This implies that either all the sheeps or none will survive. If the chief does not communicate his/her information, it is likely that the shepherds will randomly choose the road.

The question is: should the chief share this information with the shepherds or not? If so, (s)he is playing a risky (all or nothing) strategy. If not, (s)he is taking a minimax strategy where it is more likely that some of the flocks will survive. Is there a way to calibrate the amount of information to be shared?

There are several interesting similarities between this story and the main issue of the paper. Is there a way to find a compromise between the general goal and a single objective? Is it possible to find a prior - or a strategy - which is not so bad for any of the problems at hand?

Our view is that, if the answer is "yes", this prior should not depend on the particular list of problems. In other words, it would be great to have just "one" overall prior. In this respect, the hierarchical approach seems to be more promising.