=

1.25in .125in .25in

The Black Hole-Host Galaxy Relation in Active Galactic Nuclei

Introduction

Compact dark masses, probably massive black holes  (MBHs), have been detected in the cores of many normal galaxies (Kormendy and Richstone 1995). The black hole  mass seems to correlate with the host galactic bulge, although with a significant scatter, with the MBH being about 0.006 of the mass of the spheroidal bulge (Magorrian et al.  1998). Recent research using higher quality HST data and a 3-integral model give lower black hole  masses and an average black hole  to bulge mass ratio of 0.002 (Ho 1999).

In addition to the MBHs detected by techniques of stellar and gas kinematics, recently the masses of MBHs in AGNs has been estimated by reverberation mapping of the broad emission-line region and the virial assumption. High quality reverberation data and virial masses are presently available for 20 Seyfert 1 nuclei (Wandel, Peterson and Malkan 1999, hereafter WPM) and 17 PG quasars (Kaspi et al.  2000). It is interesting to find whether AGNs follow a similar black hole  -bulge relation as normal galaxies. This could test of the generality of this relation as well as reveal new facts bout the nature of AGNs, in particular about the relation between the host galaxy and the central source.

Evidence that the black hole  is related with the virial mass on an intermediate scale, the narrow line region, comes from the correlation between the black hole  mass and the velocity dispersion of the narrow emission-line gas, as measured by the OIII lines in Seyfert 1 nuclei (Wandel and Mushotzky 1986; Nelson 2000).

For Seyfert 1 galaxies the measurement of the black hole  mass and the host bulge is easier than in more luminous AGNs: Because of their lower nuclear brightness, the bulges of Seyfert galaxies can be observed more easily and closer to the center than in quasars. In addition, the BLR in the less luminous Seyferts is smaller and hence reverberation mapping requires a shorter time sequence.

Using the WPM sample Wandel (1999) found that the ratio of black hole  mass to bulge magnitude for Seyfert 1s is significantly lower (by a factor of 20, on average) than the ratio found by Magorrian et al.  (1998) for MBHs in normal galaxies. Comparing the reverberation masses with the more careful analyses of stellar dynamics, Ho (1999) found lower black hole  masses in normal galaxies, reducing the discrepancy with the reverberation  -mapped Seyferts, but a factor of ~  5 remained.

Recently it has been found that the correlation of the black hole  mass with the stellar velocity dispersion (rather than the bulge luminosity) is significantly tighter than with the bulge luminosity (Ferarrese and Merrit 2000, Gebhardt et al.  2000a). Furthermore, in the black hole  mass - stellar velocity dispersion plane, the discrepancy between normal galaxies and Seyferts seems to disappear (Gebhardt et al.  2000b). In this work we suggest some possible explanations to these observations.

BLR reverberation as a probe of black hole  masses

The best resolution of HST in relatively nearby galxies translates into a distance of a few tens of parsecs from the MBH. Reverberation mapping of the broad emission line region in AGNs gives a much closer view - a few light days from the center. Assuming the line-emitting matter is gravitationally bound, having a Keplerian velocity dispersion , it is possible to estimate the virial mass: M  ≈  G- 1rv2. This expression may be approximately valid also in the case the line emitting gas is not bound, such as radiation-driven motions and disk-wind models (e.g. Murray et al.  1998). The main problem in estimating the virial mass from the emission-line  data is to obtain a reliable estimate of the size of the BLR, and to correctly identify the line width with the velocity dispersion in the gas. WPM used the continuum/emission-line cross-correlation function to measure the responsivity-weighted radius cτ of the BLR (Koratkar & Gaskell 1991), and the variable (rms) component of the spectrum to measure the velocity dispersion in the same part of the gas which is used to calculate the BLR size, automatically excluding constant features such as narrow emission lines and Galactic absorption. The case for a central MBH dominating the kinematics in the broad emission-line region is supported by the Keplerian velocity profile ([formula]) detected in NGC 5548 (Peterson & Wandel 1999). The virial masses derived from different emission lines at several different epochs are all consistent with a single value ([formula]) which demonstrates the case for a Keplerian velocity dispersion in the line-width/time-delay data. A similar result holds for three other AGNs (Peterson & Wandel 2000).

The Black-Hole - Bulge Relation

Seyfert 1 galaxies

The black hole  -bulge relation has been derived for the Seyfert 1 galaxies in the WPM sample with the virial mass derived from the Hβ line by the reverberation-rms method. The bulge magnitudes were taken from the compilation of Whittle et al.  (1992), who calculate the bulge magnitude from the total blue magnitude, using the empirical formula of Simien & deVaucolours (1986), relating the galaxy type to the bulge/total fraction. The bulge magnitudes are corrected for the nonstellar emission using the correlation between Hβ and the nonstellar continuum luminosity (Shuder 1981).

Fig. 1 shows the black hole   mass as a function of the bulge luminosity for all the objects in Wandel (1999) plus NGC3516 and NGC 4593. The best fit is  logMbh  =  1.1 logLbulge  -  3.9 where the black hole  mass and bulge luminosity are in solar units. This is by a factor of ~  5 - 7 lower compared to the equivalent relation for MBHs in normal galaxies (fig 2 of Gebhardt et al.  2000a, represented by the dashed line in fig. 1). This difference is significant even when the uncertainties in the bulge luminosity and black hole  mass are considered.

Translating the bulge luminosity to mass (using the mass-to-light relation for normal galaxies, [formula], Faber et al.  1997) the Seyfert sample average is < MBH >  = 0.0003 < Mbulge  >  , significantly lower than 0.002, the value for MBHs in normal galaxies (Ho 1999).

Quasars

Laor (1998) studied the black hole  -host bulge relation for a sample of 15 bright quasars. The bulge luminosity is estimated from Bahcall et al.  (1997) is rather uncertain as the host galaxy is dominated by the much brighter nonstellar source. Also the black hole   mass is estimated using the empirical radius-luminosity relation rBLR = 15L1 / 244  ~    ~  light  -  days where [formula] in units of [formula][formula]. As this relation has been derived for less than a dozen low- and medium luminosity objects (mainly Seyferts) with measured reverberation sizes, it is not obvious that it may be extrapolated to more luminous quasars. One could test the empirical approximation by comparing the masses to the reverberation masses measured by Kaspi et al.  (2000), who find a different r - L relation. Unfortunately there are only four common quasars in the two samples. For three of them the reverberation masses are lower (by factors of 1.5-3) than the masses estimated by Laor.

Comparing Normal Galaxies, Seyferts and Quasars

Fig. 2 shows the three groups in the plane of black hole  mass vs. bulge luminosity. The best fits to the data in the three groups are ([formula] and [formula]):

Galaxies (Gebhardt et al.  2000a) - log M8  =  1.14 log L10 - 0.1, R2  =  0.81

Quasars (Laor 1998) - log M8  =  1.1 log L10  +  0.2, R2  =  0.52

Seyferts (WPM) - log M8  =  1.1 log L10 - 0.8, R2  =  0.45

We see that the three slopes are quite similar (and, within the uncertainty of the fit, consistent with unity); Quasars are consistent with normal galaxies (if the masses are decreased by 0.3 dex, as may be concluded by the comparison with the reverberation values, the two fits almost overlap). Seyfert galaxies are by a factor of 5 lower.

As a group Seyfert 1 galaxies have a significantly lower black hole  to bulge luminosity ratios than normal galaxies and quasars. This lower value agrees with the remnant black hole   density derived from integrating the emission from quasars (the dashed line denoted Q in fig 2). Compared to the density of starlight in galaxies ( ρgl) it gives (Chokshi and Turner 1992) [formula] where ε is the efficiency.

The black hole  mass -velocity dispersion relation for AGN

The reverberation  black hole  masses of Seyfert galaxies seem to be significantly smaller, when compared to the host bulge luminosity, than MBHs in normal galaxies. However, compared to the stellar velocity dispersion the difference is much smaller or nonexisting (Gebhardt et al.  2000b; Merritt & Ferrarese 2000). The agreement between Seyferts and normal galaxies in the black hole  mass-velocity dispersion relation suggests that the reverberation  masses are essentially correct. Nevertheles, this relation remains to be confirmed for a larger number of AGNs (at present only seven of the Seyfert galaxies with reverberation  mapping have reliable determinations of stellar velocity dispersion. In particular, the Seyfert galaxy NGC5548 has not been included in the sample of Gebhardt et al.  (2000b) because it had a poor velocity dispersion (Nelson and Whittle 1995). If it were included, it would violate the black hole  -velocity dispersion relation by a large factor, requiring a 3 times larger velocity dispersion than measured, in order to fit.

Another complication could be that the black hole  is influencing the stellar velocity dispersion measured for the more massive black holes  . The influence of the MBH on the stellar velocity dispersion can be estimated by comparing the expected velocity field [formula]) due to the MBH and the velocity dispersion of the bulge of the host galaxy. The black hole  enhances the velocity dispersion in an observed region if its mass is comparable to the stellar mass within the radius corresponding to the projected angular size. This can be measured by the dimensionless quantity

[formula]

where MBH is the mass of the MBH, σ is the "background" stellar velocity dispersion in the bulge of the host galaxy, θ is the angular size (e.g. the width of the slit) and D is the distance to the galaxy. In other words, m is roughly the ratio of the mass of the MBH to the stellar bulge mass inside the radius corresponding to the angular size being sampled. The nuclear velocity dispersion in normal galaxies is typically sampled with a slit of order 1-2arcsec . Since the measured velocity dispersion is line-of sight brightness-weighted, and since the brightness-density increases steeply at the center, the effective value of θ is probably even smaller. Quantitatively, the influence parameter can be written as [formula], where θ has been assumed to be 1 arcsec . Typically [formula][formula], [formula] and D  ~  10 - 20Mpc, hence m for the galaxies with measured velocity dispersion and black hole  mass (the samples of Gebhardt et al.  2000a and Ferrarese & Merrit 2000) is of order 0.01-1, with the more massive black holes  having larger values. If m is larger than 0.2-0.3, the observed nuclear velocity dispersion is noticably enhanced. This effect is weaker in AGN, because the contribution from the inner part must be blocked out or subtracted, hence the effective θ is larger than in normal galaxies, the velocity dispersion is smaller relatively to the bulge luminosity, hence "shifting" AGNs to lower velocity dispersions (relatively to e.g. the bulge luminosity) making them appear to agree better with the Mbh  -  σ relation of "normal galaxies" than with their Mbh - Lbulge relation.

Is the difference between Seyferts and normal galaxies apparent or real?

Figures 1 and 2 show that in spite of the scatter there is a significant difference in the black hole  mass- bulge luminosity (or mass) relationship of Seyferts and ordinary galaxies, the former showing systematically lower Mbh / Lbulge values. This may be an apparent effect, due to one of several reasons: (i) reverberation  masses in Seyferts are systematically too low, (ii) the measured bulge luminosity in Syeferts is systematically too large, (iii) black hole  masses measured by kinematical methods are systematically too large. These possibilities are considered in the following sections. There could be a forth cause, that the difference between the two groups is real: either Seyfert galaxies have systematically larger (or brighter) bulges, or they have systematically smaller black holes . The latter case is discussed in the last section. There are a number of observational errors or uncertainties that may cause an apparent difference in the black hole  - bulge luminosity relation between AGN and normal galaxies:

Errors in Seyferts' bulge luminosities

The discrepancy between Seyferts and normal galaxies' MBH-bulge relation could be accounted for if the bulge luminosities of the Seyfert galaxies are systematically over estimated. The recent result that Seyfert nuclei are in good agreement with normal galaxies' MBHs when the velocity dispersion, rather than the bulge luminosity is being considered (Gebhardt 2000b, Merritt and Ferrarese 2000) suggests that the problem may be in the bulge magnitude determination for Seyferts. However, this explanation requires that the bulge magnitude of Seyferts be systematically over-estimated by a factor of 3-10 for most Seyfert galaxies in the sample. As the uncertainty in the determination of the bulge magnitude and in the deduction of the non-stellar component is significantly less (Whittle 1992), such a large and systematic over-estimation is not likely.

Systematic errors in the black hole  masses

It has been shown that the black hole  masses in Magorrian et al.  (1998), especially at the high-mass end of the distribution are overestimated. While the difference between the BH-bulge luminosity relations of Magorrian et al.  and the Seyfert reverberation sample was a factor of 20 (Wandel 1999), with the corrected sample it decreases to 5 (fig 2). Considering the careful determination of the corrected black hole  mass in normal galaxies, a further significant decrease in unlikely.

Uncertainties and non-virial BLR dynamics

Is it possible that the Seyfert black hole  -reverberation  masses are systematically underestimated by the remaining factor? This is unlikely as the reverberation  masses seem to be more or less correct, in light of the good agreement in the case of the black hole  - velocity dispersion relation. The uncertainty in the reverberation  virial method is not well known. While for individual objects a factor of 2 is probably representative, the sample average error is probably much smaller. Note that if the virial assumption is incorrect and the BLR is unbound, the gas velocity is actually larger than Keplerian, the black hole  mass would have been overestimated, which increases the discrepancy between the black hole  -bulge relation in Seyfert galaxies and normal galaxies.

Bias introduced by the stellar kinematics method

Is it possible that the Seyfert galaxies in the WPM sample represent a larger population of galaxies with low black hole  -to bulge luminosity ratios, which is under-represented in the presently available MBH sample? This could be the case for MBHs detected using stellar dynamics, because in this method cannot detect small black holes  , and the detection-limit increases with distance. In a resolution-limited method, this would infer a detection lower limit which increases with luminosity. This hypothesis is supported by the distribution of black hole  masses in fig. 2: there are only few MBHs with masses under  [formula] detected by stellar dynamical methods. These are the Milky Way M31 and its satellite M32, and NGC 3377. These galaxies do have low black hole  -to bulge luminosity ratios, comparable to the Seyfert average relation. In angular-resolution limited methods, the MBH detection limit is correlated with bulge luminosity: for more luminous bulges the detection limit is higher, because the stellar velocity dispersion is higher (the Faber-Jackson relation). In order to detect the dynamic effect of a MBH it is necessary to observe closer to the center, while the most luminous galaxies tend to be at larger distances, so for a given angular resolution, the MBH detection limit is higher. This may imply that the sample is biased towards larger MBHs, as present stellar-dynamical methods are ineffective for detecting MBHs below [formula] (except in the nearest galaxies). The BLR method is not subject to this constraint, hence Seyfert galaxies may be revealing the relatively low-mass MBH population.

Orientation and BLR geometry

If the broad emission-line region (BLR) has a flattened geometry, the velocity inferred from the observed line width may smaller than the 3D velocity dispersion, depending on the inclination and the amount of flattening. For example, for a flat BLR configuration viewed at an inclination angle i (where i = 0 would be pole-on), the line-of-sight velocity is smaller than the 3-D velocity by a factor of sin(i). The inferred mass would be smaller than the actual mass by a factor of sin 2(i). For a random distribution of inclination angles, the average inferred mass would be decreased by this factor weighted by the distribution, [formula]. Actually, the distribution is probably not random. According to the unified scheme, Seyfert 1 nuclei are viewed more pole-on, within an openning angle of [formula] so that the weighted average mass-reduction factor is [formula]. If the BLR distribution is not flat but with an angular distribution of orbits spanning an angle δ, the effect would be less - between sin(i) and sin(δ + i), depending on the distribution of orbits, [formula]. This can easily explain the factor ~  5 discrepancy between the black hole  mass - bulge luminosity relation in normal galaxies and reverberation AGNs, even for mildly flattened BLR geometry. The orientation effect also explains the significantly larger scatter of the Seyferts, compared with normal galaxies - due to the distribution of inclination angles.

Quasar-Seyfert Discrepancy: Evolution?

The arguments above could explain the discrepancy between MBHs in normal galxies and Seyferts. Since they can all be applied also to quasars, one could expect quasars to show a similar discrepancy compared to MBHs in normal galaxies. However, this is not the case, as quasars appear to have a similar black hole  -to bulge luminosity relation as normal galaxies. Hence, there is a discrepancy between quasars and Seyferts, which cannot be explained by the arguments in the previous sections.

One possibility to "reconcile" the black hole  -bulge relation of the quasar sample with the Seyferts' one would be that the bulge luminosity in Laor's work is systematically underestimated by a factor of ~  10. Laor (1998) admits the difficulty in estimating the bulge component, but estimates the uncertainty to be modest and not systematic. As noted, three of the four PG quasars in Laor's sample which have reverberation data have masses lower (by factors of 1.5-3) than the masses estimated by Laor. This factor is however not enough to explain the quasar-Seyfert difference.

Another explanation is that the difference between the black hole -bulge relation in Seyferts and quasars is intrinsic. Wandel (1999) suggested that during their very luminous phase AGN approach the Eddington luminosity and the central black hole  accretes within a relatively short timescale a significant fraction of the available matter, reaching higher masses (compared to the bulge mass). While Seyferts have presumably not yet reached that very luminous phase, MBHs in normal galaxies may be the remnants of a luminous AGN phase. This scenario could explain both: the discrepancy between Seyferts and quasars, and the matching BH-bulge relations of quasars and MBHs in normal galaxies. This has been followed by a simple model calculation by Wang, Biermann and Wandel (2000) who examined the relative contribution of mergers to the bulge and MBH masses. For reasonable parameters they find that the bulge to black hole  mass ratio of [formula] could be the limit of black hole  evolution by Eddington-limited accretion enhanced due tomergers.

Summary

We examine the discrepancy between the black hole  - bulge luminosity relation of MBHs in normal galaxies (found by kinematic methods) and reverberation  -mapped Seyfert nuclei (Wandel 1999) for updated data and find that the difference is smaller than first estimated but still significant. We point out that although for the correlation between black hole  mass and bulge velocity dispersion Seyferts and kinematicly detected MBHs seem to agree, the AGN case in this correlation needs further study. We suggest three classes of explanations for the apparent discrapency between the black hole  mass - bulge luminosity relation of Seyfert galaxies and MBHs in normal galaxies: Observational or method-related errors or bias, Orientation-related effets for Seyferts and Evolution. In reality, several of these causes may be present and contribute to the difference between the black hole  mass - bulge luminosity relations of Seyferts, quasars and MBHs in non-active galaxies.