Does Dark Matter Exist?

Introduction

Discrepancies between the apparent baryon content of galaxies and galaxy clusters and their dynamically inferred masses are generally attributed to dark matter (DM). A still larger mass discrepancy exists out to the horizon scale, since Big Bang nucleosynthesis requires a low baryonic mass fraction in the universe (Tytler et al. 2000), which nevertheless appears to have flat geometry (de Bernardis et al. 2000; Hanany et al. 2000). The missing energy density required by conventional cosmology is now supposed to reside not only in non-baryonic particles, but also partly as vacuum energy.

The currently popular ΛCDM model for the evolution of structure in the universe is quite successful on large scales (e.g. Bahcall et al. 1999), but its predictions on galaxy scales disagree with observed properties of galaxies. A number of lines of evidence suggest that the problem is more fundamental than simply our inadequate understanding of the process of galaxy formation.

Mass Distributions in the Inner Parts of Galaxies

Before listing the problems of DM, we briefly review two properties of the mass distribution within galaxies that exacerbate some of the difficulties. Our conclusions are controversial, but we find strong evidence for both points.

First, putative galaxy halos seem to have cores of finite, as opposed to cusped, central densities. Density estimates from rotation curves of low-luminosity and low surface brightness (SB) galaxies are most revealing, since these galaxies have the largest mass discrepancies and therefore halos for which compression by baryonic infall is least important. Van den Bosch et al. (2000) stress that the inner slope in HI data can be underestimated because of "beam smearing," and Swaters et al. (2000) indeed find that optical data often indicate a steeper rise; but their cases either require, or are consistent with, a finite density core - whatever M/L is ascribed to the luminous component. Other well-resolved rotation curves of low-luminosity galaxies (Rubin et al. 1985; Courteau 1997; Sofue et al. 1999; Blais-Ouellete et al. 2000a,b; Palunas & Williams 2000) generally also reveal a gentle rise, indicating that their halos do indeed have low-density cores.

Second, the mass in the inner parts of bright galaxies is dominated by the luminous disk and bulge. "Maximum disk" models are strongly suggested by the impressive match between the shapes of inner rotation curves and predictions from the luminous matter alone (Kalnajs 1983; Kent 1986; Broeils & Courteau 1997; Palunas & Williams 2000), and other evidence is reviewed by Bosma (1999) and Freeman (this meeting). Furthermore, recent work on barred galaxies (Debattista & Sellwood 1998, 2000; Weiner et al. 2000) has shown that any DM halo makes a negligible contribution to the inner rotation curve even after the formation of the disk and bulge, and that this conclusion for barred galaxies also holds for their unbarred counterparts.

Problems Created by the Dark Matter Hypothesis

The problems we list here mostly relate to properties of galaxies. The first ten are well established and are ordered such that those which are generic to any form of DM come before those specific to particular DM models. The last two are less well established observationally but are potentially just as thorny. The physics of galaxy formation is undeniably messy, creating scope for counter-arguments that may avert individual difficulties. We do not have space here to evaluate the many such arguments that have been advanced, but no combination of such ideas comes anywhere near to resolving all these problems.

The "disk-halo conspiracy" (Bahcall & Casertano 1986) describes the absence of a feature in galaxy rotation curves at which the dominant source of central attraction changes from luminous matter to dark. Many galaxies are now known in which the rotation curve does drop somewhat at the edge of the visible disk (e.g. Casertano & van Gorkom 1991; Verheijen 1997; Bosma 1999), but it is extremely rare for the drop to exceed about 10%. Blumenthal et al. (1986) showed that a featureless rotation curve is expected if DM dominates galaxies right to their centers, but it is much harder to understand why the circular orbital speed from the luminous matter, which dominates the inner region (see ), should be so similar to that from the DM at larger radii. For any galaxy dominated by stars in its center, initial conditions for the dark and luminous matter must be finely tuned to produce a flat rotation curve.

Extreme low-SB galaxies lie on the same Tully-Fisher relation (TFR) derived from high-SB galaxies, with somewhat greater scatter (Zwaan et al. 1995; Sprayberry et al. 1995; McGaugh et al. 2000). Thus we observe similar circular speeds in all galaxies of a given luminosity, no matter how widely the luminous material is spread. This amazing result requires that the overall M/L of the galaxy rises with decreasing SB in just the right way so as to preserve a tight relation between total luminosity and circular speed. Either the true M/L of the stellar population changes with surface brightness, which seems unlikely (de Blok & McGaugh 1997), or the DM fraction rises as the luminous surface density declines. The needed variations would be minor if DM dominated in all galaxies, but since stars dominate the mass in the inner parts of high-SB galaxies (), eliminating the SB dependence again requires careful tuning.

Sanders (1990), Milgrom (1998) and McGaugh (1999a) show that mass discrepancies begin to be detectable only when the acceleration drops below [formula]. Any DM model must reproduce this characteristic acceleration scale over a wide range of galaxy sizes, but none has yet done so convincingly.

Aside from the disk M/L, DM halo fits to rotation curves generally employ two extra parameters: e.g. the core radius and asymptotic velocity, or the scale radius and concentration index. Actual galaxy rotation curves do not require all this freedom, however, since they can be fitted with only the disk M/L as a parameter (e.g. Sanders & Verheijen 1998) when a modified gravitational force law of the MOND form (Milgrom 1983) is employed. Any DM model must therefore contain a physical mechanism that relates the halo parameters to the luminous mass distribution.

A merging hierarchy causes the cooled baryonic fraction to lose angular momentum to the halo, making disks that are too small (Navarro & White 1994; Navarro & Steinmetz 1997). The predicted angular momentum of the disk is at least an order of magnitude less than that observed. The problem is only partially ameliorated (MacLow & Ferrara 1999; Navarro & Steinmetz 2000b) if some process (usually described as "feedback from star formation") prevents most of the gas from cooling until after the galaxy is assembled. While this difficulty is best known within the CDM context, merging protogalaxies in any hierarchical structure formation model with DM will involve chronic angular momentum loss to the halos (e.g. Barnes 1992).

Every collapsed halo should manifest the same peak phase space density, f max, if DM is collisionless, was initially homogeneously distributed, and had an initially finite f max (Liouville's theorem). Further, the finite central density of galaxy halos () both suggests that halos collapsed from material having in initially finite f max (infinite initial phase space density forms cusped halos) and also allows f max to be estimated easily. The spectacular variation of f max between galaxies found by Sellwood (2000) and Dalcanton & Hogan (2000) indicates that DM cannot be a simple collisionless particle.

High-resolution simulations that follow the formation and evolution of individual galaxy halos in CDM find strongly cusped density profiles (Moore et al. 1998; Klypin et al. 2000) even before the baryonic component cools and settles to the center. No observational evidence requires halos to have the predicted cusps. Further, the "concentration index" has a wide range (Bullock et al. 1999), but most fits to rotation curves yield values well below the predicted range in all types of galaxy () - even the Milky Way (Navarro & Steinmetz 2000a).

Navarro & Steinmetz (2000a) describe their failure to predict the zero-point of the TFR as a "fatal problem for the ΛCDM paradigm." They show that no matter what M/L is assumed for the disk, the predicted circular speed at a given luminosity is too high because the halo density is too high.

Simulations produce numerous sub-clumps within large DM halos (Klypin et al. 1999; Moore et al. 1999). The clumps are more numerous than the numbers of observed satellite galaxies, and may threaten the survival of a thin disk in the host galaxy.

The TFR discrepancy is even worse, since CDM predicts [formula] (Dalcanton, Spergel & Summers 1997; Mo, Mao & White 1998), whereas Verheijen (1997) stresses that when V is interpreted as the circular velocity of the flat part of the rotation curve, the true relation is very nearly [formula]. Any mechanism which systematically boosts luminosity as a function of mass must also reproduce the very small scatter in the TFR.

The DM halos that form in simulations are generally tri-axial (Dubinski & Carlberg 1991; Warren et al. 1992), but become nearly oblate in their inner parts when a disk is added (Dubinski 1994). Current constraints on halo shapes (Sackett 1999) are generally thought to be consistent with these predictions. However, the halo of NGC 2403 seems to become more nearly axisymmetric at larger radii (Schoenmakers 1998), opposite to the CDM expectation, and Franx et al.  (1994) find IC 2006 to be impressively round at 6Re. Much more data are needed to determine whether this behavior is typical or anomalous.

The first precision measurements of the microwave background power spectrum at sub-degree scales show a second acoustic peak greatly suppressed compared to the first (de Bernardis et al. 2000; Hanany et al. 2000), producing an uncomfortable fit to standard cosmological models (e.g. Lange et al. 2000; Tegmark et al. 2000). McGaugh (1999b) has pointed out that unforced acoustic oscillations, as might be expected in the absence of dark matter potential wells, give such a peak height ratio.

Only three of these problems hinge on the properties mentioned in : If disks in bright galaxies are significantly sub-maximal, problem 1 would largely go away and 7 would be weakened (while 2 would be altered, not solved). If halos have mild density cusps, problem 6 would go away and 7 would again be weakened.

Discussion

The first five problems on our list are the most generic and intractable in DM models. Problems 1, 2 & 4 do not merely arise from mismatches between theory and observation, but require fine tuning in any DM scenario. Any physical process to account for them must somehow couple the dark and luminous components. If the only interaction between the baryons and DM is gravitational, it is hard to imagine how such a mechanism could arise.

Problems 7-10 are well-rehearsed difficulties of CDM. The possibility that 7 & 8 could be solved by a more realistic treatment of baryonic processes alone is remote since they relate to the total mass distribution which, in the simulations, is dominated by DM. Even if the baryonic mass fraction is significant, it is unclear what process could loosen tight DM concentrations; for example, Debattista & Sellwood (2000) show that an intolerable degree of dynamical friction has a very mild effect on the halo density profile. Problems 9 & 10 could conceivably be solved by some kind of complex baryonic physics (i.e. star formation), but this solution to 10 would require more fine tuning.

Another approach to problems 7-10 is to modify the assumed properties of the DM particles. Warm DM (e.g. Colombi, Dodelson & Widrow 1996; Sommer-Larsen & Dolgov 1999; Hogan 1999) is designed to aid problems 7 & 9 in two ways: WDM particles stream freely in the early universe suppressing small-scale power. They also have larger velocity spreads in halos of greater volume density, because of Liouville's theorem, thereby precluding strong density gradients. However, fermionic WDM falls foul of problem 6, while bosonic warm DM, which has a small fraction of very high phase space density material (e.g. Madsen 2000), would probably again form cusped halos as in CDM. Self-interacting dark matter (Spergel & Steinhardt 2000) can in principle solve problems 7 & 9 (Burkert 2000; Davé et al. 2000) but only if the cross section is tuned; it may also have difficulties with its prediction of spherical halos. We emphasize that hypothetical modifications to the properties of DM particles have been motivated mostly by problems 7 & 9, and any collisional effect removes 6, but none address the much more difficult problems 1-5.

The Alternative

If the problems listed in cannot be solved in the context of an acceptably simple DM model, the only logical alternative is to modify gravity in the weak-field regime. No satisfactory theory that achieves this has yet been proposed.

Remarkably, we already know the effective force-law for galaxies (McGaugh 1999a): MOND (Milgrom 1983) is a highly successful phenomenological description of the dynamical data on spiral galaxies which effortlessly resolves problems 1 through 4, 6, 10 & 11 above. Thus it disposes of those most intractable in DM models (although problem 3 is "resolved" only by introducing a new fundamental physical scale). Problem 2 was a notable prediction of MOND. It seems not unreasonable to imagine that the other problems might also be resolved once a theory of galaxy formation is formulated in some modified gravity theory.

But modifying the law of gravitation is not a panacea; in particular it faces serious challenges in reproducing the successes of standard cosmology. The following is a list of some more obvious difficulties.

A modified theory must be cast as a generally covariant theory to reproduce Einstein gravity in its well-tested regimes. So far, attempts to fit MOND into a natural metric framework have been largely unsuccessful (Sanders 1997).

It must establish a cosmology in which the scale factor evolution yields the first CMB acoustic peak at its observed angular scale.

Without DM, Silk damping (Silk 1968) at the time of recombination would eradicate primordial fluctuations on scales of galaxies and smaller. A new source of fluctuations to seed the growth of galaxies would therefore be required (Sanders 1998).

In the DM picture, the tiny fluctuations observed in the microwave background have grown to the observed current large scale structure only because the DM density variations started growing before recombination. A cosmology without DM requires other means to increase the growth factor since the time of recombination (Sanders 1998).

Observed gravitational lensing must arise solely from the baryonic matter distribution.

One other issue might be added to both this list of problems and that in . Current observational data strongly indicate a cosmological constant (e.g. Jaffe et al. 2000), while conventional physical theories offer no explanation for its tiny value (Weinberg 2000) and it requires us to live at a special time in the evolution of the universe. It is conceivable that a dramatic alteration of gravitation and cosmology might provide a different reason for accelerated expansion.

Future signatures of the absence of DM might include a still more strongly suppressed third acoustic peak in the CMB. In the absence of any driving force from dark matter, its amplitude should be further suppressed relative to the second peak due to Silk damping, while most conventional models predict an enhanced third peak from driven baryon compression. Another possible test is the imprint of these peaks on the large-scale structure power spectrum (Eisenstein & Hu 1998): without a dominant contribution of DM to the gravitational potential, substantial oscillations in the power spectrum of large-scale structure might survive.

Conclusions

Dark matter models are facing increasingly serious difficulties on galaxy scales as the quality of both the simulations and the data constraining the properties of galaxy halos accumulates. Those who suggest that a revised law of gravity in the ultra-weak field limit might be more natural (Milgrom 1983; Sanders 1997; McGaugh & de Blok 1998; Mannheim 2000; and others) are regarded as radicals. However, theories incorporating both a fine-tuned cosmological constant and dark matter particles with ad hoc properties have lost the compelling aesthetic simplicity of the original CDM model.

The problem of formulating a generally covariant, alternative theory of gravity upon which a competing model of structure formation can be built is itself a severe challenge. Without such a theory, we cannot say whether the other problems on our preliminary list in will turn out to be harder to resolve than those of , and it is possible that the list would grow to become still more daunting if such a theory could be developed. But the difficulties facing DM models and the success of the MOND phenomenology suggest that a serious examination of alternative gravity solutions is called for.