=

1.25in .125in .25in

The Massive Stellar Population in a Nearby Massive Low Surface Brightness Galaxy

Introduction

The mere existence of low surface brightness disk galaxies (LSBs) has profound implications for the evolution of the universe, both at high and low redshifts. The number of LSBs found as a function of magnitude is consistent with no turnover in the counts down to the limit of current data (O'Neil & Bothun 2000, Ferguson & McGaugh 1995), and thus their contributions to the galaxy luminosity and mass functions on both the low and high luminosity and mass ends are not well constrained. Little is known about their epoch of formation.

Gas-rich, large LSBs also provide a window into the extreme environment of very inefficient star formation. Enormous efforts have been made to study blue compact dwarf galaxies (BCDs) and starburst galaxies as examples of extreme environments for vigorous star formation, while efforts to study the other extreme have centered largely on dwarf galaxies. Only recently have the larger, gas-rich systems come under scrutiny. Yet despite this recent research activity, the underlying stellar populations of disk LSBs and their detailed star formation histories remain poorly understood. Star formation in large LSBs has presumably proceeded in a much different way than in dwarf galaxies or HSB disk galaxies. While broadband optical and near-infrared observations have begun with the intention of studying the stellar populations in the galaxies and comparing them to current models of varying metallicities, disentangling age versus metallicity effects using broadband filters remains problematical, even for well-studied HSB galaxies (Worthey 1994; Bruzual & Charlot 1993; Charlot et al. 1996). By resolving the brightest stars and the tip of the Red Giant Branch (TRGB), both in the relatively red central region and out in the blue disk of a large LSB, UGC 2302 (D  ~  15 Mpc), we obtain direct information on the age and metallicity of the underlying stellar population as a function of radius.

Preliminary Results

We have obtained deep images in F555W and F814W of UGC 2302 using the WFPC2 on HST. The images were reduced, calibrated, and aligned. Photometry was performed on the stars common to both filters. We find: (1) UGC 2302 clearly shows underlying spiral structure (see Figure 1, left); (2) UGC 2302 has a small nucleus or central star cluster (see Figure 1, left); (3) The disk of UGC 2302 appears to be nearly transparent except in the very central regions (see Figure 1, left); and (4) We have detected the tip of the Red Giant Branch (TGRB) at mF555W  ~  25 and mF555W  -  mF814W  ~  1.5 (see Figure 1, right). Also seen is the blue main sequence at mF555W  ~  25 and mF555W  -  mF814W  ~  0.