=

1.25in .125in .25in

Substructure and halo density profiles in a Warm Dark Matter Cosmology

[formula]The warm dark matter (WDM) scenario has been proposed as an alternative to alleviate the overly number of small halos (satellites) found within Milky Way-size halos in cold dark matter (CDM) N-body simulations with respect to observations (Hogan & Dalcanton 2000; White & Croft 2000). We have performed cosmological N-body simulations with several free-streaming scale-lengths, Rf = 0.2, 0.1 and 0.05 Mpc, corresponding to "warmon" masses mW of 1.7, 1.0 and 0.6 KeV. The power spectrum of fluctuations below Rf is exponentially damped. We have used a flat cosmological model with ΩΛ  =  h = 0.7; this is one of the most successful models at large scales. Relatively isolated (host) halos of masses of the order of the Milky-Way or Andromeda galaxies were chosen to be re-simulated within a multiple mass scheme. In this way, our host halos had more than 105 particles each and the abundance of sub-halos within them could be studied with confidence.

[formula]Abundance of satellite halos. Despite power spectrum is suppressed below the free-streaming scale Rf, halos close or smaller than Rf do form. Comparing the observed cumulative maximum circular velocity satellite function with models and in the understanding that a galaxy will form in each halo, we find that models with Rf  ~  0.1 - 0.2 Mpc are preferred (Colín et al. 2000); in these cases the number of Milky Way satellites is ~  2 - 3 times less than in the CDM simulation (see also Klypin et al. 1999). We find that in the WDM scenario not only less small halos are formed than in the CDM one but also are the small halos more easily disrupted during host halo evolution. The percentage of halo destruction for the CDM and WDM (Rf = 0.1 Mpc) simulations, from z = 1 to z = 0 is 35% and 63%, respectively. Interestingly, in the CDM case, the rates of satellite accretion and destruction reach a balance in such a way that the number of guest halos remains almost constant since z = 1 (see also Moore et al. 1999). The more efficient disruption of halos in the WDM scenario is likely due to the fact that small halos are less concentrated.

[formula]Density profiles. The host WDM halos (M≫  Mf, where Mf is the mass corresponding to Rf) have density profiles and concentrations similar to those of the CDM halos. The guest WDM halos (M[formula] Mf) are systematically less concentrated than the corresponding CDM halos. Note that the cosmogony of these halos is not hierarchical but they form through fragmentation and monolithic collapse. In the 109 - 1011 h[formula] mass range the c1 / 5 concentrations for the WDM (Rf = 0.2 Mpc) model are ≈  1.8 - 1.2 times smaller than those obtained in CDM simulations. The c1 / 5 parameter is defined as the ratio between the halo radius and the radius where 1/5 of the halo mass is contained. In order to explore with more detail the inner structure of halos with masses below Mf, we have increased Rf and studied host halos which have several times 104 particles. The results confirm that the concentration of halos with M[formula]Mf is smaller than the one corresponding to CDM halos, and this difference can hardly be explained as a result of statistical scatter. On the other hand, the density profiles of most halos do not strongly depart from the NFW profile; the inner slopes are ~   - 1, shallower than for the CDM halos. Finally, in our new simulations, we have introduced the corresponding thermal velocity dispersions vth and have found that the structure of the halos is not affected, even with a vth 2 times larger than the corresponding vth for mW  ~  0.6 - 1 KeV (making echo to claims that a larger vth could be possible if warmons self-interact weakly, Hannestad 2000).

[formula]In conclusion, the WDM scenario offers a viable solution to the satellite overabundance problem and it improves the agreement with observations regarding the concentrations and the inner density profiles of dwarf and LSB galaxies (according to recent observational studies, the halo structure of these galaxies does not disagree with the NFW profile, although their concentrations are smaller than in the CDM case, e.g. van den Bosch & Swaters 2000). Besides, the formation of realistic disks seem to be favored in the WDM scenario (Sommer-Larsen & Dolgov 2000). On the other hand, for warmon masses > 0.75 KeV, the power spectrum of the Lyα clouds agrees with observations (Narayanan et al. 2000). For these WDM models, we do not find serious difficulties regarding the Tully-Fisher relation and the dwarf satellite formation epochs (the power spectrum regeneration is very quick and efficient, e.g., White & Croft 2000). Nevertheless, the WDM scenario could not explain shallow halo cores and central densities independent of mass; if observations confirm these trends (e.g., Firmani et al. 2000) the WDM scenario should be abandoned.

V.A. received financial support from CONACyT grant 27752-E.