Gas & Galaxy Evolution: HI Imaging of the Large Magellanic Cloud

Introduction

The 21-cm line emission from the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) was first detected by Mills (1953) and a preliminary survey of its distribution was conducted by Kerr et al. (1954). The full HI structure of the LMC was first surveyed by McGee (1964) and McGee and Milton (1966) using the Parkes single dish radio telescope. The overall distribution of the neutral hydrogen gas in the LMC and its relation to the Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) and the Galaxy were first described in those papers. More recently, the details of the HI distribution and dynamics in the LMC have been re-examined with the Parkes telescope by Rohlfs et al. (1984) and Luks and Rohlfs (1992).

Recent high resolution HI sysnthesis observations using the Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) of the LMC (Kim et al. 1998) and the SMC (Staveley-Smith et al. 1997; Stanimirovic et al. 1999) have provided the detailed HI structure and can be used to show the correlation between the surface density of HI gas and the HII regions and stellar objects. This paper presents the combined ATCA interferometric survey of neutral hydrogen in the LMC with new Parkes telescope observations and provide a set of images sensitive to all angular spatial scales.

Observations

The ATCA was used in the mosaic mode to survey a region 10[formula] ×   12[formula] covering the LMC, and at an angular resolution of [formula], corresponding to a spatial resolution of 15 pc (for an assumed distance of 50 kpc). The detailed observations and data reduction are described in Kim et al. (1998). The ATCA data for the LMC have been combined with Parkes single-dish data in order to correct for the spatial filtering properties of the interferometer.

The Parkes observations were taken with the inner 7 beams of the Parkes Multibeam receiver in December 1998. The telescope has a half-power beamwidth of 14. A total bandwidth of 8 MHz was used with 2048 spectral channels in each of two orthogonal linear polarizations. The velocity spacing of the multibeam data is 0.82 km s- 1, but the final cube was Hanning-smoothed to a resolution of 1.65 km s- 1. The velocity range in the trimmed final cube is - 66 to 430 km s- 1 with respect to the barycentric reference frame. The ATCA map and the Parkes data cube were compared within the region of visibility overlap (21 -   31 m) and corrected for flux calibration factor f = 1.3 at the effective beam size of 16.9 arcmin and then combined using IMMERGE in MIRIAD. The resolution of the combined HI image of the LMC is 1 which is the same as for the ATCA interferometer map. The pixel size in the final maps is [formula], corresponding to [formula] pc.

Result

We show the brightest HI emission component of the LMC at each spatial position from all the channel maps in the heliocentric velocity range of Vhel = 190 to 387 km s- 1 from the combined ATCA interferometeric survey in Figure 1. The HI column density image in this velocity range is shown in Figure 2. A spiral structure is clearly seen within outer disk as it is already explained in the analysis of the ATCA map alone (Kim et al. 1998). The supergiant shells which were previously defined in the ATCA data (Kim et al. 1999) are prominent and shells with diameters of a few tens of parsecs to hundreds of parsecs are still dominant features. The prominent HI hole is situated in the direct vicinity of the western end of the optical bar (Kim et al. 1999). The large HI cloud complex south of 30 Dor appears to be the counterpart for the huge complex of molecular clouds detected in a complete CO survey by Cohen et al. (1988).