New supersymmetric standard model with stable proton

The supersymmetric standard model (SSM) is considered to be one of the most plausible extensions of the standard model (SM). In particular, the minimal SSM (MSSM) is usually treated as the standard theory around the electroweak scale. However, this MSSM suffers one potentially serious problem. The proton may decay through baryon-number-violating couplings of dimension four, and thus its life time could become unacceptably short. In order to forbid those dangerous couplings, therefore, an ad hoc discrete symmetry is imposed on the model through R parity. In the SM, on the other hand, the interactions which induce the proton decay are not allowed by gauge symmetry. The SSM would become more plausible, if the proton can be protected from decay more naturally.

In this report, we present a new SSM [\cite=model1] [\cite=model2], in which the proton stability is guaranteed by an extra U(1) gauge symmetry, within the framework of a model coupled to N = 1 supergravity. This model also provides natural explanations for the μ parameter and neutrino masses which are merely put by hand in the usual SSM.

Keeping the extension of the SM as minimal as possible, the particle contents of the model are taken as shown in Table 1. The extra U(1) gauge symmetry is denoted by U'(1), for which the charges of superfields are expressed as QQ, QUc, etc.. The index i ( = 1,2,3) of the superfields for quarks and leptons stands for the generation, while the indices j [formula] of H1 and H2, k [formula] of S, and l [formula] of K and Kc are attached for possible multiplication.

In addition to the superfields of the MSSM, our model has SM gauge singlets Nc and S for, respectively, right-handed neutrinos and Higgs bosons to break the U'(1) symmetry. The superpotential is then required to contain the couplings H2LNc and SNcNc for giving non-vanishing but tiny masses to the ordinary neutrinos. The μ term in the MSSM is replaced by SH1H2. New colored superfields K and Kc are incorporated to cancel a chiral anomaly. Their fermion components can receive masses from SKKc.

The hypercharges of K and Kc, the U'(1) charges of all the superfields, and the numbers nj, nk, and nl are determined by chiral and trace anomalies and necessary couplings of superfields. Barring irrational hypercharges for K and Kc, we obtain [formula] and nj = nk = nl = 3. The superfields with the same quantum numbers are all triplicated. The hypercharge YK is either 1/3 or -  1/3. However, the proton stability is satisfied only for YK = 1 / 3. In this case, allowed couplings of dimension four are given by H1QDc, H2QUc, H1LEc, H2LNc, SH1H2, SNcNc, and SKKc. The baryon number is conserved. The lowest dimension couplings with baryon-number violation are given by the D terms of QQUc *Ec *, QQDc *Nc *, and QUc *Dc *L, which are of dimension six. The proton decay is adequately suppressed. On the other hand, for YK =  - 1 / 3, the particle contents of one generation can be embedded in the fundamental 27 representation of the E6 group. As well known, the baryon and lepton numbers are not conserved in couplings of dimension four, such as UcDcKc and LQKc, inducing a fast proton decay.

Requiring orthogonality between U(1) and U'(1) generators, the U'(1) charges of the superfields are determined up to a normalization factor. In Table 2, we show the U'(1) charges which are normalized to the U(1) charges.

The superpotential is given by

[formula]

where all the couplings allowed by gauge symmetry and renormalizability are contained. The couplings are all cubic, and there is no mass parameter.

The model is coupled to N = 1 supergravity, which breaks supersymmetry softly in the observable world. The Lagrangian contains, as well as supersymmetric terms, mass terms for scalar bosons and gauge fermions, and trilinear couplings for scalar bosons. In the ordinary scheme, the masses-squared and trilinear coupling constants for the scalar bosons have universal values m23 / 2 and A, respectively, at the energy scale a little below the Planck mass. Hereafter, the scalar components of the superfields H1, H2, and S are expressed by H̃1, H̃2, and S̃.

The parameter values of the model change according to the relevant energy scale. The mass-squared of H̃32 receives large negative contributions through quantum corrections, owing to a large coefficient ηu of H32Q3Uc3 related to the top quark mass. As a result, this mass-squared becomes small around the electroweak scale, leading to non-vanishing vacuum expectation values (VEVs) for H̃31 and H̃32. The electroweak symmetry is broken through radiative corrections. On the other hand, for the first two generations, quantum corrections to the masses-squared of H̃i1 or H̃i2 are not large, so that the VEVs of these scalar bosons vanish. If a coefficient λK of S3K3Kc3 is large, the mass-squared of S̃3 is also driven small. A non-vanishing VEV is induced for S̃3, and the U'(1) symmetry is broken spontaneously.

The scalar potential is numerically analyzed at the electroweak scale to examine the parameter regions which give a vacuum consistent with experimental results. In particular, the U'(1) symmetry predicts a new neutral gauge boson Z', for which stringent constraints are obtained on the mass and the mixing with the Z boson of the SM. We assume that H̃31, H̃32, and S̃3 of the third generation have non-vanishing VEVs, which are denoted by v1, v2, and vs. It is shown that sizable regions are allowed for the mass-squared parameters M2H1, M2H2, and M2S of the Higgs bosons. The coefficient λH of SH1H2 should be around 0.1 - 0.4. Owing to the constraints from the Z' boson, M2H1 is mostly larger than (1 TeV)2. The value of M2H2 is generally smaller than M2H1 in magnitude, and M2S is always negative. The VEV of S̃ is larger than 1 TeV.

The term λHSH1H2 assumes the μ term of the SSM. The effective μ parameter is given by [formula], which has an appropriate magnitude for the electroweak symmetry breaking. The terms SNcNc induce large Majorana masses for the right-handed neutrinos. The ordinary neutrinos have non-vanishing masses approximately given by [formula]. Taking for λN  ~  λH, the neutrino masses become very small if the coupling constants ην for the neutrino Dirac masses are of the order of that for the electron ηe. A typical mass scale of squarks and sleptons is given by the universal value m3 / 2 for the scalar boson masses, which is around MH1 and thus of order 1 TeV. Then, the smallness of the neutron and the electron electric dipole moments, which is another problem in the MSSM, can be explained.

In this model, the lightest Dirac fermion ψK in the K and Kc system is stable, having both color and electric charges. In the early universe, after going out of thermal equilibrium, this fermion is bound to become a color-singlet particle. Since its mass is large, the decoupling occurs much earlier than for the up and down quarks. Therefore, the bound state is mainly formed by ψK and its anti-particle. This is an electrically neutral meson, and eventually decays into lighter particles. The remnants for ψK could exist in the present universe, and may be explored by non-accelerator experiments. However, its relic density depends on various uncertain factors, making a definite prediction difficult.

The energy dependencies of the model parameters are quantitatively described by renormalization group equations. The coupling constant ηu for the top quark mass should be around unity at the electroweak scale, which is obtained for ηu > 0.1 at the high energy scale. The coupling constant λK evolves similarly. If both ηu and λK are larger than 0.1 at the high energy scale, the mass-squared parameters M2H2 and M2S receive large quantum corrections. Taking the universal values as m23 / 2  ~   (1 TeV)2 and A  ~  1 for the mass-squared parameters and the trilinear coupling constants, the values of M2H2 and M2S become small enough at the electroweak scale to induce SU(2)×  U(1)×  U'(1) gauge symmetry breaking. The quantum corrections to these parameters also become large, if the gauge fermion is heavy. On the other hand, the energy dependence of M2H1 is weak and its value is not much different from the universal value. It is shown that there are reasonable parameter regions at the high energy scale, with the masses and trilinear coupling constants for scalar bosons being universal, which give parameter values at the electroweak scale consistent with phenomena. Unfortunately, however, the gauge coupling constants are not unified at an energy scale for possible grand unification, unless the particle contents of the model are modified.