NATURE 385, 610-612. LETTER TO NATURE

A massive black hole at the centre of the quiescent galaxy M32

Roeland P. van der Marel, P. Tim de Zeeuw, Hans-Walter Rix & Gerald D. Quinlan

1Institute for Advanced Study, Olden Lane, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA 2Sterrewacht Leiden, Postbus 9513, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands 3Steward Observatory, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA 4Dept. of Physics and Astronomy, Rutgers University, PO Box 849, Piscataway, New Jersey 08855, USA

received 23 July 1996; accepted 10 January 1997; published 13 February 1997.

=-2 Massive black holes are thought to reside at the centres of many where they power quasars and active galactic nuclei. But most galaxies are quiescent, indicating that any central massive black hole present will be starved of fuel and therefore detectable only through its gravitational influence on the motions of the surrounding stars. M32 is a nearby, quiescent elliptical galaxy in which the presence of a black hole has been however, the limited resolution of the observational data and the restricted classes of models used to interpret this data have made it difficult to rule out alternative explanations, such as models with an anisotropic stellar velocity distribution and no dark mass or models with a central concentration of dark objects (for example, stellar remnants or brown dwarfs). Here we present space-based high-resolution optical spectra of M32, which show that the stellar velocities near the centre of this galaxy exceed those inferred from previous ground-based observations. We use a range of general dynamical models to determine a central dark mass concentration of (3.4  ±  1.6)  ×  106 solar masses, contained within a region only [formula] across. This leaves a massive black hole as the most plausible explanation of the data, thereby strengthening the view that such black holes exist even in quiescent galaxies.

We observed M32 with the Faint Object Spectrograph (FOS) on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), on August 22, 1995. The COSTAR optics corrected the spherical aberration of the HST primary mirror. Spectra of the wavelength range 4572-6821 Å were taken through square apertures of 0.086'' and 0.215'', aligned on the nucleus and along the photometric major axis. The kinematical analysis was done by fitting each galaxy spectrum with the convolution of a template spectrum and a gaussian line-of-sight velocity profile. The details of the observations will be discussed by van der Marel, de Zeeuw & Rix (manuscript in preparation). The inferred kinematics are compared with the best ground-based in Figure 1. The rotation curve derived from the HST spectra rises more steeply than that measured from the ground. The velocity dispersion from the HST aperture closest to the centre is [formula]. The average of the four independent dispersion measurements inside the central 0.1'' is [formula], exceeding significantly the 85-95[formula] measured from the ground. =-2

Dynamical models are needed to infer the mass distribution from the kinematical data, and to test whether the observed velocities are consistent with a keplerian rise around a black hole. To this end we developed a new technique to construct fully general axisymmetric models that fit a given set of observations (Rix et al., van der Marel et al., Cretton et al., manuscripts in preparation). It is based on Schwarzschild's , and can be viewed as an axisymmetric generalization of the spherical technique of Richstone and . It consists of four steps: (i) an axisymmetric mass density is chosen that fits the M32 HST after projection; (ii) the gravitational potential is calculated, including a nuclear dark mass; (iii) a representative library of orbits is calculated; and (iv) a non-negative least-squares fit is performed to determine the combination of orbits that reproduces the assumed density and best fits the observational constraints.=-2

Previous studies of M32 have used either axisymmetric models with distribution functions depending only on the two classical integrals of motion (the energy E and angular momentum Lz around the symmetry axis), f(E,Lz), or spherical models with fully general distribution functions. Models of the first type take into account the flattening of M32 (projected axial ratio ~  0.73), but have a special dynamical structure. They successfully fit the ground-based data when a nuclear dark mass is but they leave open the possibility that more general models might fit the data without a dark mass. Models of the second type allow for general anisotropy, but ignore the flattening of M32. These spherical models were used only to interpret some of the older M32 and could not fit these without a nuclear dark However, we found that our less restricted axisymmetric models can easily fit these same data without a dark mass. So even though previous studies have shown that existing data are consistent with a nuclear dark mass in M32, it has not been shown that such a dark mass is required.=-2

To improve this, we used our general axisymmetric technique to determine which models can fit both the new HST data and the most recent ground-based . The models take the observational characteristics into account, and include velocity profile shape data (not available from the HST because of the limited spectral resolution of the FOS). Figure 2a shows a contour plot of the χ2 of the fit for edge-on models with a dark central point mass. The free parameters are the V-band mass-to-light ratio ΥV of the stellar population, and the dark mass [formula]. The models labelled A-D are the best-fitting models for four fixed values of [formula]. Figure 3 compares the predictions of these models with the observed major axis kinematics for each of the data sets. Models without a dark mass are ruled out; even the best-fitting model without a dark mass, Model A, fails to fit the nuclear HST velocity dispersions by [formula]. Model C has [formula], and provides the overall lowest χ2. However, we would not necessarily expect our algorithm to constrain a single, best-fit choice of the potential, since a three-dimensional distribution function might have the freedom to adjust to changes of the potential without affecting the fit to the data. Numerical experiments showed that the structure in the χ2 plot near the two minima could in fact be unreliable. We therefore do not claim that the local minimum labelled C is necessarily special, but conservatively estimate the allowed range for [formula] to be [formula]. The uncertainty takes into account not only the observational errors in the data, but also the possible influence of small ([formula] in the projected kinematics) numerical errors in the models (due to, for example, gridding and discretization). M32 need not be edge-on, but models constructed for inclination [formula] gave similar results and the same allowed mass range. A full exploration of the range of possible inclinations is computationally prohibitive, but our results and previous suggest that the inferred [formula] depends only weakly on the assumed inclination. Allowing for possible triaxiality is not likely to change these conclusions; they are due mostly to the radial behaviour of the potential, and not to its shape. The best-fitting models are not f(E,Lz) models, but are similar in that they are tangentially anisotropic and require a similar dark mass. =-2

To constrain the size of the dark mass, models were built with the point-mass potential replaced by a Plummer potential with the same mass, but with scale length ε. These were restricted to f(E,Lz) models for simplicity; constraints on ε from the more general models should not differ by much. Figure 2b shows a contour plot of the χ2 of the fit to the HST velocity dispersions, for edge-on models. The best fit has ε  =  0 (a point mass); models with [formula] are ruled out.

The mass concentration thus has a half-mass radius [formula], implying a central density [formula] ([formula]) and a mass-to-light ratio [formula] inside 0.1''. It cannot be a cluster of ordinary stars; that would evolve rapidly by stellar and a change in mass-to-light ratio from ~  2 at 1'' to [formula] at 0.1'' would yield large broad-band colour gradients, ruled out by It must be dark, either a massive black hole or a cluster of dark objects (e.g., stellar remnants, brown dwarfs, planets). No theory predicts the formation of such clusters--except for a cluster of small black holes of mass m≃5-[formula], each--and most would not last for the age of the galaxy. A dark cluster is not an acceptable alternative to a massive black hole if it will collapse to a black hole in a short time, or expand or eject its mass through explosions or evolve in some other way that would make it observable (for then we would have to assume that it formed recently). Goodman and considered possible dark clusters for M32, and argued that the clusters required [formula] to be acceptable; these were consistent with ground-based data, which ε to be as large as 0.4''. We summarize and update the arguments here to show that all but the most implausible clusters are now ruled out.

=-2 A cluster of stellar remnants of mass [formula] would undergo core collapse in a short time, [formula] for a Plummer model (and shorter for more concentrated ). Neutron stars or small black holes would form binaries and merge during the collapse by dissipating energy through gravitational The binaries would not be able to stop the collapse until they had grown large through multiple mergers, and even then they would at most cause rapid oscillations in the central density, during which they would continue to One black hole would probably grow much faster than the others in a runaway Its mass would be modest at first, perhaps [formula], and might remain considerably smaller than [formula]. This model is not ruled out, but still requires a black hole (although embedded in a dark cluster) to fit the data. A cluster of white dwarfs would evolve similarly if the white dwarfs collapse to neutron stars upon merging; if they explode as supernovae instead the cluster would either lose mass or become observable.

=-2 A cluster of brown dwarfs or planets would have a long collapse time, but a short collision . The outcome of a collision depends on the ratio of the collision and binding : brown dwarfs of mass [formula] would merge with little mass loss, leading again to the growth of a massive object; planets or small brown dwarfs would disintegrate, leading to a massive gas cloud that would be unlikely to remain dark. The constraint that the collision time be longer than the age of the galaxy rules out clusters with [formula]. It might a cluster of brown dwarfs just below the hydrogen-burning limit ([formula]) if [formula], but another rules that out. The luminous stars of mass m* that pass through the cluster would get trapped by dynamical friction in a time that depends only on the cluster density and not on m (if m  ≪  m*), [formula] (the collapse time given above reduced by m / m*). The stars would sink to the centre, probably to merge into a massive object because binaries would be unable to eject stars from the deep potential well. A cluster with [formula] would trap nearly 0.1% of the luminous stars, too many to be acceptable. This same argument limits the size of a bizarre dark cluster of elementary particles or tiny black holes to [formula].

The simplest and most plausible interpretation of the data is thus a single massive black hole. The X-ray emission from the centre of M32 could be from accretion onto the black hole, although its flux is low enough to be from a low-mass X-ray The absence of a larger flux is stars will be tidally only once every 103-[formula], and the luminosity from continuous gas accretion can be

=-2 The arguments against a dark cluster in M32 rely mainly on the high density it would have ([formula] [formula]). These arguments are weaker for the active galaxies M87 and NGC 4261, for which the dark matter density required by HST gas is only 105 (similar to the density of luminous material observed in some galactic nuclei and globular clusters). Stronger arguments can be made for three other black hole candidate galaxies requiring high densities: 107.3 for the quiescent galaxy NGC 3115, as derived from HST stellar 109.8 for our own Galaxy, as derived from near-infrared velocity measurements of individual and [formula] for the active galaxy NGC 4258, as derived from water maser Together with our M32 results this provides compelling evidence for massive black holes in both active and quiescent galaxies.

Acknowledgements: We thank Nicolas Cretton, Lars Hernquist, Steinn Sigurdsson and Simon White for collaboration in various stages of this project. The results are based on observations with the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope obtained at the Space Telescope Science Institute. STScI provided financial support through a GO grant and through a Hubble Fellowship awarded to RPvdM. STScI is operated under NASA contract by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.

Correspondence should be addressed to R.P.v.d.M (email: marel@sns.ias.edu).