1.25in .125in .25in

Tracing Cosmic Evolution with the Las Campanas Distant Cluster Survey

Summary

The past few years have been a period of tremendous progress in detection of distant clusters. As recently as five years ago no single survey contained more than ten cluster candidates at z  >  0.5, but a series of efforts have since led to a several order of magnitude increase in the number of known high-redshift systems (Postman et al. 1996, Scodeggio et al. 1999, Gladders & Yee 2001, Gonzalez et al. 2001). The recently completed Las Campanas Distant Cluster Survey (LCDCS) is our contribution to this field. Clusters in the LCDCS are detected as regions of excess optical surface brightness relative to the background sky, a technique that permits detection of clusters to z  ≈  0.9 with shallow, drift-scan imaging. The resulting statistical catalog consists of 1073 cluster candidates at [formula]0.3. To enable efficient use of these catalogs we use follow-up imaging and spectroscopy to characterize the properties of the sample, including the contamination rate as well as estimates of the redshifts and relative velocity dispersions of the candidates (see Gonzalez et al. 2001a for details).

One application of this sample is determination of the cluster correlation function (Gonzalez et al. 2001b). For roughly dispersion-limited subsamples at z  ≈  0.5 the observed angular correlation functions are well fit by the power law ω(θ) = Aωθ1 - γ with γ = 2.1. Using the angular correlation data, we derive the spatial correlation length (r0) as a function of mean intracluster separation (dc) via the cosmological Limber inversion. We find correlation lengths for the LCDCS that are similar to those observed for local catalogs, and observe a dependence of r0 upon dc that is comparable to the results of Croft et al. (1997) for the APM catalog. These results are consistent with theoretical expectations, which predict only modest evolution in the clustering amplitude since z=0.5.

Several programs are also being conducted with LCDCS clusters to study the evolution of cluster galaxies. Nelson et al. (2001a,b) are studying the structural and luminosity evolution of BCG's; Nelson et al. (2001c) are studying evolution in the luminosity function and color of the red envelope. Meanwhile, the EDisCS collaboration is conducting a deep multicolor imaging and spectroscopic survey of 20 of the most massive LCDCS candidates at z=0.5 and z=0.8, with the aim of constraining cluster galaxy morphologies, scaling relations, cluster dynamics, and the evolution of cluster galaxies at these epochs.