1.25in .125in .25in

A solution to a 100-yr problem - a connection between the transition phase in classical novae and intermediate polars

Introduction

The optical light curve of a classical nova is typically charactersed by a smooth decline. Certain novae show, however, a DQ Her-like deep minimum in the light curve while others have slow oscillations, during the so called 'transition phase'. The minimum is understood by the presence of a dust envelope around the binary system, and it was suggested that the oscillations may be connected with the formation of dust blobs moving in and out of the line of sight to the nova. It is still unknown, however, why only a small fruction (~  15% of the nova population share this peculiar behaviour.

Retter, Liller & Gerradd (2000a) suggested a solution for this problem. Their observations of Nova LZ Mus 1998, which had oscillations during the transition phase, also revealed a few periodicities in its optical light curve. LZ Mus was thus classified as an IP candidate. Retter et al. further proposed a possible connection between the transition phase and IPs, and predicted that novae having a transition phase should be IPs. Recent observations of two young novae seem to support this idea.

Observations and Analysis

The optical light curve of Nova V1494 Aql 1999/2 showed slow oscillations with a quasi-period of 7 days (Kiss & Thomson 2000). A period of 3.2 h (presumably the orbital period) was discovered in its optical light curve (Retter et al. 2000b). Drake et al. (2001, in preparation) detected a 2523-s periodicity in two X-ray runs using Chandra. The short period can be interpreted as the spin period of the binary system, and the nova is very likely an IP.

On the other hand, Nova V382 Vel 1999 had a smooth decline in the optical, and X-ray observations did not reveal any short-term periodicity. So it is unlikely that it is an IP.

About 10% of the cataclysmic variable population are IPs, which is consistent with the rarity of the transition phase in novae.

Discussion

There seems to be a strong connection between the transition phase in classical novae and IPs. Two famous examples are Nova GK Per 1901 (oscillations) and Nova DQ Her 1936 (minimum), which are well-known IPs. We suggest that this link is connected with the accretion disc. In IPs its inner part is truncated, thus it is less massive than in non-magnetic systems. The nova outburst can, therefore, disrupt the disc. Its re-establishment is a violent process that forms strong winds that block the radiation from the hot white dwarf, and the dust is not destroyed. The disc oscillates until finally reaching stability at the end of the transition phase. In non-magnetic systems the disc is barely disturbed and becomes stable much faster, and in polars there is no disc. In both these groups there is no transition phase at all since dust cannot be formed.

If the winds are very strong, as might be the case in DQ Her (perhaps since its spin period is very short) this leads to a dust minimum. IPs with longer spin periods should have oscillations.