An Architecture for Security and Privacy in Mobile Communications

Introduction

As the use of mobile communications devices has increased, many people have become more concerned with the privacy of such conversations. Most recently, talk about location-based services has raised the issue even further, particularly as more people realize that mobile phones are easily tracked--in fact, the current architecture of mobile phone systems essentially requires that they be tracked.

As the global telecommunications system has evolved, including the mobile communications system, successive improvements have typically not been designed with security and privacy in mind. For example, technological and economic choices by telecommunications providers often made it possible for governments (and others, in some cases) to eavesdrop on conversations and obtain call history information. Over the past hundred years, in fact, bodies of government laws and regulations have grown up to institutionalize these abilities, despite changes in the underlying technology.

The privacy issues become more acute with mobile systems. For example, it is now much easier for an individual to eavesdrop on cell phones (although doing so is regulated). Location-based services remind mobile phone users that they can be tracked. New threats are appearing, and old threats are becoming more visible.

Discussions about how to improve the privacy of the mobile communications network typically focus either on regulatory approaches or layered technologies. While it is certainly important to consider and enact policies to protect privacy, such regulations essentially mean: "we know you have this information, but you may only disclose it to specified parties under specified circumstances." From a user's point of view, such protection is, of course, rather limited.

An alternative approach to protecting privacy is to make it difficult, if not impossible, for anyone to collect the information in the first place. The means to do this are primarily technological, but not entirely. Layered technology approaches, such as encrypting phones, are one approach, but their effectiveness is limited by the underlying infrastructure.

In this article, we propose a communications network architecture designed for security and privacy. The architectural approach is to separate the network (providing connectivity) from the service (providing authentication, billing, and so forth). Common carriers provide the network, while the user can choose among many service providers based on their pricing, provisions for privacy, and service offerings. Security and privacy are provided because the network cannot know the identity of the users, the service cannot know the user location, and (by virtue of end-to-end encryption), no one but the correspondents can know the content of their communications.

An important goal of this work is to explore the limits on how much security and privacy can be achieved in a large communications network. Even if the system is unrealistic, or simply impractical to deploy in place of the existing system, such an exploration can help Understanding these limits helps to measure the effectiveness of other approaches

In order to focus our discussion, we focus mainly on the technologies and policies in the United States, although the fundamental issues of both are global in nature. We also focus primarily on mobile voice communications, although many of these ideas can clearly be applied to stationary phones and to data networks, whether stationary or mobile.

Mobile Communications Today

The current wireless networks in North America are based on "cells", which divide a telephone service territory into small regions for efficient use of low-power transmitters with minimum interference. The end user devices are generally dumb (indeed, the industry calls them "terminals") and intelligence--that is, call management, routing, and other services--is lodged in the network. A simplified architecture of the cellular network is shown in Figure [\ref=fig:cell]. A much longer discussion of current telecommunications systems can be found in Tomlinson [\cite=Tomlinson00:Telecommunications].

When a cell phone is turned on, it locates a nearby cell, which tells it what channels to use and what transmit power to use. As a phone moves, it will repeat this process as it enters new cells. Phones identify themselves to the network using a unique ID, called an electronic serial number, or (ESN). The ID is mapped to a phone number within the network. A common attack on cell phone systems to obtain fraudulent service is known as "cloning," in which the ESN is duplicated for another phone.

For billing, the network where the phone is located sends a billing record to the phone's service provider. The raw call detail records are translated according to rates and plans into particular charges for the end user. The carriers also settle accounts with each other for the services incurred on the other's network. End users typically pay a combination of monthly service charge and per-minute charges, although prepaid plans with only per-minute charges are becoming more popular.

The various wireless network technologies in current use have very different approaches to security. Early analog cell phones have essentially no security capabilities. The North American digital standards have voice privacy using encryption, but the system is notoriously weak. The European GSM standards also support voice encryption, but they are subject to a variety of straightforward attacks. In the U.S., the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has required that location information be available for all mobile phones by October 31, 2001. While the FCC's regulation was primarily intended to be used for locating a phone used to call for help in an emergency, service providers are looking for ways to take advantage of the information to generate revenue.

Security and Privacy in Mobile Communications

Every day, telephones are used millions of times for private discussions, whether business secrets or personal affairs. Most of the time, the speakers give little thought to the security or privacy of their communications. What are the issues in a typical call?

First, the parties do not necessarily have a good idea who the other one is. When speaking to others they know, people can identify them by voice. Beyond that, there is no real authentication in the system. Many people easily accept any identification given to them on the phone: "I'm from the IRS, and we're just checking up on a problem with your tax return. Could you give me your Social Security number?" Similarly, there is no certainty that calling a phone number gets to the right person or organization, though it is admittedly harder to persuade someone to call a spoofed number.

Second, someone else may be eavesdropping on the conversation, whether by a wiretap or by intercepting a conversation broadcast by a cell phone or cordless phone. Existing standards for voice privacy on digital (but not analog) phones provide some protection, but not against a determined attacker. In practice, the technology discourages simple scanning and opportunistic eavesdropping.

Third, billing records provide an audit trail held by the service provider of calls made and received, and the phone number (though not the actual personal identity) of the other party. These records are often used by law enforcement, and sometimes in other circumstances as well.

Fourth, caller ID (CID) and automatic number information (ANI) reveals the phone number of the caller to the recipient. While we don't dispute the usefulness of caller ID, it does reveal information that the caller may wish to keep private. Symmetrically, having a single phone number used for multiple calls, or by different callers, may link together information that the recipient may wish to keep private.

Fifth, the weak authentication of devices in the system makes fraud possible. The mobile telecommunications industry has spent an enormous amount of money to combat fraud by putting more intelligence in the network. Here it is important to note a critical distinction about authentication: devices (e.g., phones) can be authenticated to the network as legitimate, and users can be authenticated to each other, regardless of the phones they are using. In fact, it is only important for the device to be authenticated to the network to link it to a billing account in the current architecture. We will return to this problem below.

Finally, it is important to note that solving many of these security problems requires an end-to-end approach. That is, the security relationship exists between the end users (or, at least, the end devices), not with parts of the network. For example, consider a system that encrypts the signal between a wireless phone and the cellular base station, and then encrypts the signal from the base station through the phone network. The security is not end-to-end, because the an intermediate system--the base station--has access to the clear version. This approach to system design is described in more detail by Saltzer et al [\cite=Saltzer84:Endtoend].

These problems of security and privacy are fundamental aspects of the telecommunications system, and we can measure the effectiveness of a given system for security by how well it eliminates each threat.

Legal Environment

Historically, in the United States, security and privacy of mobile communications has passed through a number of phases. Section 605 of the Communications Act of 1934 says:

In other words, it was not illegal to listen to a call, but it was illegal to tell anyone about it. Scanner and short-wave enthusiasts had free rein of the airwaves for the next fifty years. In 1984, however, the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) changed the situation to make it illegal to "intentionally intercept...any wire, oral, or electronic communication.." While the act does provide for some exceptions, the law essentially made it illegal to listen to another's conversation without authorization. Later, the Telecommunications Disclosure & Dispute Resolution Act of 1992 made it illegal to manufacture or sell equipment that was capable of receiving cellular or cordless telephones.

Notwithstanding these U.S. restrictions on the public intercepting wireless communications, the 1994 Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA) requires that carriers implement and as necessary modify their equipment to facilitate the ability of the government to intercept communications. An FCC report on the law stated:

In a sense, the primary purpose of CALEA was to preserve the ability of the U.S. government and other law enforcement organizations to conduct wiretaps and trace telephone calls, an ability that was jeopardized by evolving technology. Much more background on wiretaps and communications policy can be found in Diffie and Landau [\cite=Diffie99:Privacy].

Separately, the U.S. government has historically discouraged the use of encryption. While the official policy of the U.S. government is that no restrictions be placed on the ability of its citizens to use encryption technology, it has long placed fairly stringent controls on the export of encryption technology. This has effectively discouraged the sale of encryption systems in the U.S. market as well. Both the export regulations and the market conditions for encryption system have changed in recent years, but such devices as encrypting phones are still not widely available.

In summary, while it is not illegal for end users to communicate securely, government policies effectively discourage such systems. In particular, telecommunications carriers are prohibited from offering secure services to a broad market, leaving the burden of security entirely on the end users.

Requirements and Desiderata

Now we turn to the requirements for a secure and private mobile communications system. In addition to the basic security requirements described earlier in section [\ref=sec:security], there are several important requirements for the different players in the communications network. For our simplified architecture, we look at required and desired properties for four kinds of participants: end users (including application providers), carriers, and governments.

For End Users

In this system, the category of "end users" includes people who make and receive telephone calls, as well as application providers. Applications providers are those who are providing some service (that is, an application) over the communications network. We use the term "application provider" instead of "service provider" to avoid confusion with those providing telecommunications services (i.e., carriers). The simplest case of an application provider is just a person answering a telephone call, but other applications may be quite different.

System requirements for end users include:

No one else should be able to bill calls to another account. In addition, a stolen phone should be useless, thus discouraging theft.

The network should keep no record of calls sent or received, but the user should have access to complete call detail information. This implies that there are no records about uses of digital information services.

It should not be possible to record a clear version of a conversation or data session.

It should not be possible to discover the location of a user, but the user should be able to release her location as desired. For example, a stalker with access to the network should not be able to track an individual.

It should not be possible to identify the end user or the end device. For example, a device should not have a static ESN.

Location information is not normally available to anyone, except that the network does know the location of a device that is transmitting at a particular time. Users can choose to release location information to application providers, or it can be automatically released for a call to emergency services.

In a sense, these are the most important requirements in the system, because it is the security and privacy of the end users that concerns us here. Of course, some of them imply a requirement for end-to-end security, since the network is not trusted.

For Carriers

Telecommunications carriers obviously have many requirements for the systems that they will build and operate, and they must certainly be concerned with building scalable, reliable systems. For the architectural discussion here, we focus on some fundamental requirements that make it possible to operate the service as a business.

Carriers should be paid for providing services.

The system should have adequate defenses against fraud.

There must be mechanisms for naming and addressing end devices, and for routing the communications.

It should be possible to provide add-on features, such as voice mail, call forwarding, etc.

We are specifically omitting many aspects of regulated telecommunications services, such as universal service, regulated pricing, etc., since they are not directly relevant to this architectural proposal.

For Governments

The primary requirements for governments and telecommunications systems are as follows:

Provide location information for emergency services

Provide access to communications and information about communications for law enforcement

Provide a robust infrastructure for use in emergencies

Satisfying the first requirement is an important aspect of the architecture described below. The second is problematic. Certainly society has an interest in catching criminals, but we strongly oppose the notion that everyone's privacy must suffer to make law enforcement's job easier. We believe that the benefits to society given by removing security and privacy from the network are outweighed by the risks of giving the government too much power. The current executive and judicial branches and their agencies are, we are sure, staffed only by people with the highest honor and integrity, but it has not always been so, and may not be again.

An Architectural Proposal

Our proposed architecture has three main components: the wireless device (phone), the network, and the service. The role of the network is to provide the raw communications fabric among wireless devices and between wireless devices and wireline carriers. The network does not know the identity of the users and does not have a persistent identifier for the devices. The role of the service is to provide a directory linking the identity of the users to the transient identifiers of wireless devices and to provide for billing and other advanced features. The role of the phone is to manage the end-to-end encryption of communications. A high-level diagram of the system architecture is shown in Figure [\ref=fig:newarch].

The easiest way to introduce the architecture is to follow the life cycle of a call.

When a device (phone) first becomes active, it establishes an anonymous relationship with the network. In effect the network assigns a transient ESN, or TESN, to the device. The TESN will be used by the device for as long as it wants. A privacy-conscious device might change its TESN for every call, in order to avoid linking the TESN to an identifiable succession of calls.

Because service has not yet been established, the device cannot make general connections (except perhaps for emergency calls). However, the device is allowed a digital connection to the service supplier of its choice (for convenience, these are identified by URLs). The connection between the device and the service supplier is made over an end-to-end encrypted channel, so neither other users nor the network itself can intercept the communications.

The service provider and the device agree on services and payments. The service provider will, in turn, pay the network fees for the activities of the device with the particular TESN.

In order to make a call, the originating device uses the dialed identifier (the phone number) to look up the service provider of the destination device in a directory. That service provider is in a position to supply the destination device's current network provider and the current TESN within that network. The originating device can now establish an end-to-end encrypted connection to the destination device.

Naming, addressing, and routing

In older telephone networks, names, addresses, and routes were essentially the same: a telephone number. One dialed a particular number (naming), that number was assigned to a particular phone somewhere (addressing), and the number included information on how to route the call (country code, area code, exchange, local identifier). Human-sensible naming was handled outside the system through paper directories.

In the modern wireless network, names are represented by telephone numbers, addresses by ESNs, and routing is managed by the network. Human-sensible names are still handled outside the system through paper directories and increasingly through online directories. In addition, almost every device has a built-in local directory for speed dialing.

We propose a complete dissociation of naming, addressing, and routing that is quite analogous to the methods used by Internet electronic mail (see sidebar).

Naming

Naming will be handled by multiple layers of directories. Devices will have a search path of directories. The dialed name is given to each directory in the search path in turn, until a directory either responds with a translation into a new name, a translation into an address, or a new directory to try. A directory will typically be identified by a URL that responds to the directory lookup protocol. Thus, the "normal" path through the name lookup system will typically require the following steps:

Look up a name in local device directory (e.g., the speed dial directory), which will translate the dialed name "Mom" into her public directory entry.

Look up the public directory entry in the given public directory to obtain Mom's service provider and her ID within that provider.

Look up mom's service-provider-specific-id in the service provider's directory to obtain mom's current address.

This design provides a number of interesting opportunities:

A person does not need to place an entry in a public directory. Instead, one can place an entry in private directories of one's own choosing.

Directory entries can be have limited access, so that only people with appropriate permissions can call you. Indeed, the full power of directory systems such as LDAP can be brought to bear, so that it is easy, for example, to grant calling permission to groups, not just to individuals. Of course, such a system would require authentication in order to make a decision about access.

A person can have many directory entries, in the same or different directories. This makes it easy to, for example, to give individual names to different callers, which in turn makes it possible control, route, or avoid calls from particular callers.

The lookup process can be delegated to servers on the network, so that the process can avoid multiple round trips to wireless devices with lower bandwidth and greater latency.

By disassociating names in this way, the mechanism becomes both more flexible and more private, particularly because names can be created for short-term use and for giving to specific callers for future use.

Addressing and Routing

Addresses in this system are anonymous and transient. End devices can change addresses as often as desired simply by informing their network (to enable routing and billing) and by informing their service provider (to enable name translation and billing). An address has the form <  network identifier:TESN>  , which provides the carrier network with enough information to handle routing.

Routing will be the province of the networks, and it is their responsibility to deliver data to the correct device given its address.

Payment

The end user pays the service provider under whatever terms and using whatever mechanism they have negotiated, whether that be billing, credit card, or digital cash. Similarly, the service provider pays the network using a negotiated mechanism. In this system, it is possible for service providers to pay in near real-time using a digital cash system. By doing so, it is possible to have service providers who need not keep billing records, and therefore leave no information about what calls were made.

By separating the payment stages in this way, the connection between the end user and the network is broken: the network cannot identify the end-user. While the end-user may have limited choice of networks, he can choose from many alternative service providers, selecting one based on price, privacy, services offered, or quality of customer service.

Call privacy

Security of the content of calls will be based on end-to-end encryption. For the purposes of the current paper, we will assume that the encryption algorithm for call content is secure, so that the primary problem is agreement on a session key. This is more difficult than it sounds because while two remote devices can easily agree on a key, using the Diffie-Hellman key exchange algorithm, for example, the process is subject to man-in-the-middle attacks unless the end devices have a way to authenticate each other. Alice is trying to call Bob, but man-in-the-middle Martin pretends to be Bob to Alice, and pretends to be Alice, to Bob. In other words, unless we exercise sufficient care, the caller will get a secure connection, but maybe not to the correct destination.

There are several approaches to this problem, all of which are embodied in various other systems today:

Meet in person. Any two phones, if brought together so that their owners can authenticate each other, can agree on keys for use in future calls.

Public key certificates signed by a certificate authority and stored in a directory. A certificate attests to the binding between a key and a name.' Because these certificates are signed by a well known public key (that of the CA), anyone can check them and tampering in the directory is difficult.

PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) certificates are similar to the public key certificates referred to previously, except that there is no Certificate Authority. Instead, PGP relies on a "web of trust". Anyone can sign a key and the software will look for a chain of signatures leading to a signature you recognize. If you call the same folks frequently, it is easy to build up to high-quality authentication.

Self-signed certificates. A self-signed certificate is a way of tying together a name and a key, but anyone can create a self-signed certificate for any name they choose and place it in a directory. The defense against this attack is for devices to periodically check their own entries to assure their accuracy. In case the bad guys have subverted the directory to respond correctly only to such queries, devices should use a proxy to check the directory entries.

Anonymous key exchange. While subject to man-in-the-middle attacks, this approach prevents eavesdropping attacks. Authentication could be accomplished by other means over the secure channel.

SSH approach. In the SSH ("secure shell") approach, the web Secure Session Layer algorithm is used, but with self-signed certificates for each end of the connection. There is no special attempt to authenticate the initial connection (beyond trusting the naming and addressing systems) but since SSH remembers the certificates, it is easy to re-authenticate.

Ultimately, the end devices themselves (with some help from the end users) are responsible for the privacy of the communications. Service providers or the network itself might facilitate authentication, though the end users would obviously be required to trust them to some extent.

Service Provider

The service provider fulfills two essential functions:

Mapping directory entries to transient network addresses

Providing payment to the network carrier

The service provider may also provide value added services such as

Providing a customer statement with call detail

Forwarding calls for privacy

Voice mail

Let us consider two examples of service providers, occupying opposite ends of the privacy spectrum.

Traditional Service Provider

The traditional service provider makes wireless service under the new architecture look much like current service. The phone is given a more or less permanent number, and the service provides a directory which translates that number into the phone's current transient ESN. The service provider accepts billing records from network carriers for the phone's activities, pays the carriers, and provides a traditional detailed billing statement for the end user. The identity of the end-user is well known.

High-Privacy Service Provider

The high-privacy service provider goes to extreme lengths to safeguard the privacy of the end-user. This service provider is much like a current phone card operator, except that the user can receive calls as well as place them.

The service provider does not know the end-user identity, instead having a (digital) cash relationship with the customer.

The provider creates, as requested, any number of single-use ids which map to the phone's transient ESN. The end-user can give out a different "phone number" to every correspondent.

The service provider can operate a relay service, so that calls are relayed through a static location, thus concealing from the remote end even the transient ESN. The relay does not have access to call content - that is still end-to-end encrypted.

The service provider can pay network carriers with cash, and consequently have no need to retain billing records.

The service provider does not provide statements.

Between these two extremes is a wide variety of opportunities for service providers to stake out markets based on price, payment options, privacy of customer records, etc.

Can we get there from here?

Is this a realistic system? Is it one that could be deployed as an evolution of the current infrastructure? From a technical point of view, we think the answer is yes. The major changes needed to implement this architecture are in the billing and directory systems, and in the deployment of devices that are capable of secure communications. Because wireless networks are already capable of managing call routing to ESNs that suddenly appear on their network, the core infrastructure does not change much. It should also be possible to phase in many of the changes proposed here, so it is not necessary to have a brand-new system deployed at once.

The economic case is somewhat harder. In part, this is because the architecture depends somewhat on separating some functions--the service provider and the carrier network--that are often combined today (albeit ones that are interconnected with other carriers). There is no obvious incentive for companies to unbundle their current services to implement the proposed architecture. A second problem is that changing the system to improve security would likely cost more for customers, and it is not clear that customers would value the security and privacy improvements enough to pay for them.

Finally, as we have noted, the legal and regulatory systems, in the U.S. as well as other countries, discourage secure communications. In fact, carriers implementing the proposals described here might possibly be in violation of CALEA.

Conclusions

Today's mobile communication system provides few assurances about the security and privacy of one's communications. In this paper, we have proposed a high-level system architecture for a communications system that does provide strong guarantees for security and privacy for end users. We believe that the architecture is technologically feasible to deploy on a large scale, but the current market and legal environments will certainly not encourage its use.

This proposal demonstrates, however, that it is possible to have such strong guarantees. Therefore, when technologists, policy makers, and businesspeople are evaluating options to increase security and privacy in the telecommunications network, they can use the strong guarantees as a benchmark for comparison in how effective the options are.