Possible Odderon discovery at HERA via charge asymmetry in the diffractive π+π- production

Introduction

The Odderon -- a C-odd Regge singularity with intercept close to 1 -- is an inevitable feature of QCD motivated picture of high energy scattering and its experimental discovery and the determination of its coupling to hadrons is crucial for the QCD theory of strong interactions. Within perturbative QCD, the pomeron exchange is naturally modelled by the color-singlet two-gluon exchange in the t-channel.

Although much effort has been put forth to verify the Odderon existence, up to now the Odderon remains elusive. After years of vain search for the Odderon signal in particle-antiparticle cross section differences, the focus of investigation shifted towards processes initiated exclusively by Odderon, namely, photoproduction of scalar or tensor mesons γp  →  {π0,  η,  ηc  f2} + p'. However the cross sections involved are quite low and the signal seems hardly separable from the background.

The idea

We propose a novel idea, inspired partly by earlier work [\cite=brodsky] of how to catch a glimpse of Odderon existence. We suggest to look at dipion, not any concrete meson, photoproduction process γp  →  π+π-p' at high energies. Then, the Odderon will reveal itself as the only source of kinematical charge asymmetries in the dipion spectrum.

Indeed, such a reaction can proceed via two types of channels. The first type involves the Pomeron exchange, which helps the initial photon turn into vector or higher spin mesons with C =  - 1, which then decay into π+π- pair. The second type has Odderon as the t-channel exchange, which lets the photon transform into scalar or tensor mesons with C =  + 1 with their subsequent decay into dipion.

Obviously, the two mechanisms of dipion production do not interfere in the total cross section, but the interference effect is still present in the differential cross sections: [formula]. So, the essense of our idea is to extract this interference term.

However, if we try to tackle this problem at the partonic level (that is thinking that we produce q pair by either pomeron or Odderon without asking how quarks will hadronize), we immediately run into a difficulty. Indeed, at the partonic level the pomeron induced amplitude is predominantly imaginary, while the Odderon induced amplitude is mostly real. This makes the interference term suppressed [\cite=brodsky] by small factor [formula], which is in addition sensitive to the yet unknown value of Odderon intercept.

A closer look, however, shows that this is a fake problem. Indeed, in reality we produce mesons, hadronic resonances, but not quarks. Introduction of intermediate resonances instantaneously brings extra phases -- the Breit-Wigner phases -- and removes the spurious orthogonality of the pomeron and Odderon amplitudes.

This observation can be viewed as an example of strong breaking of parton-hadron duality: the final-state interaction has such a profound effect, that is gives birth to a new effect.

In order to extract charge asymmetric terms in differential cross sections, we suggest to perform their Fourier analysis. In doing so, we find it particularly useful to introduce two types of asymmetries: the forward-backward (FB) and the transverse ([formula]) asymmetries defined according to: [formula], where θ and δ are the polar and the azimuthal angles of π+ in dipion rest frame. The physical meaning of non-zero AFB is that one of pions tends to move faster than the other, while [formula] would mean that one of pions is produced preferrably along, or opposite to, momentum transfer [formula].

A promising case: ρ / f2(1270) interference

The above paragraphs contain already the key idea of our proposal. A numerical illustration can give a feeling of the magnitude of the effect.

As said above, the production of the dipion can proceed via formation of a whole number of intermediate resonances. However it is known that the whole (π+π-)C =  - 1 spectrum around M  ~  1 GeV is overwhelmed by the ρ peak, while the most prominent feature of the (π+π-)C =  + 1 spectrum in this region is the f2(1270) resonance. Therefore it seems quite a reasonable approximation to consider only two diagrams: those with Pomeron induced γ  →  ρ transition and with Odderon induced γ  →  f2(1270) transition.

Since the helicity properties of the Odderon exchange are not yet established, we considered two extreme cases: (1) strict s-channel helicity conservation (SCHC) for both ρ and f2, and (2) maximal s-channel helicity non-conservation (SCHNC) when f2 meson is produced only in ±  2 helicity state. In the former and the latter cases we expect FB and transverse asymmetries respectively.

Within the framework of SCHC, the two properly normalized amplitudes, written explicitly in terms of corresponding cross sections, are

[formula]

One sees that Breit-Wigner phases present here insure maximal interference effects directly under ρ peak (where both amplitudes become almost real) and directly under f2 peak (where both amplitudes turn predominantly imaginary). In the former case, however, the charge symmetric contribution is huge, which greatly suppresses the local FB asymmetry defined as [formula]. On the contrary, under f2 peak the charge symmetric contribution is still saturated by the disappearing ρ meson tail, and therefore one can expect the largest AFB(M2) here. The value of this FB asymmetry directly under f2 resonance can be then estimated as

[formula]

Here for simplicity we took Bρ = Bf2. Plugging in numbers and using σρ  =  6μb and σO = 20 nb [\cite=berger], we predict the peak value of local FB asymmetry as high as AFB(m2f)  ≈  21%. If one asks for the integrated asymmetry in the optimal region 1.1  <  M  <  1.4, one gets AFB  =  11%  .

We can also analyze the case of maximal SCHNC, i.e. when f2 meson is produced only in ±  2 helicity state (as indeed indicated by some model calculations [\cite=berger]). Cross section σf  ≈  20 nb is now ascribed to this production. The amplitudes A P(ρ+ 1) and AO(f+ 22) can be written in an analogous form. Local transverse asymmetry at the f2 peak is found to be [formula]. The integral transverse asymmetry within the invariant mass range 1.1  <  M  <  1.4 adds up to [formula].

Competitive mechanisms

In order to safely interprete the charge asymmetry as the manifestation of the Odderon, we must make sure that no other competitive mechanism can lead to the same effect, at least with that large magnitude.

There are two contenders: the secondary reggeon (ρ  /  ω) and the photon exchanges. However both contributions are suppressed so that in the HERA energy domain both σρ  /  ω(γp  →  f2p) and σγ(γp  →  f2p) lie below 1 nb. Thus we arrive at the conclusion: if the Odderon-induced cross section is as strong as expected (σO(γp  →  f2X)  ~  20), then no other mechanism can mimic the Odderon signal.

Conclusions

In this work we suggested a radically different way to search for much needed but still elusive Odderon: that is, to look at charge asymmetries in the spectrum of photoproduced dipions.

We also observed in our particular problem remarkably severe breaking of much-celebrated parton-hadron duality. The origin of this breaking was the strong final state interaction of produced quark-antiquark pair.

Our main finding can be states as: regardless of the nature of Odderon exchange, regardless of the precise helicity structure of the Odderon coupling to matter, irrespective of the exact value of Odderon intercept, the Odderon will be seen, unless some tremendous unforeseen suppressions come into play. Borrowing the Odderon-induced cross sections from models, we predict charge asymmetries to be as huge as 10 - 20%. This effect is so prominent and so clear, that it must be easily seen at HERA.