The Prototype of theSmall Synoptic Second Solar Spectrum Telescope (S5T)

Science Case

The observation of weak, turbulent magnetic fields on the Sun is challenging for many reasons. First of all, the Zeeman effect is virtually blind to these fields and therefore they do not show up in conventional magnetograms. The discovery of the Second Solar Spectrum [\citep=sss] paved the road for a complementary magnetic field diagnostic through the Hanle effect. The analysis by [\citet=TBnature] based on various observations of the Second Solar Spectrum and extensive modeling of the action of the Hanle effect revealed the presence of ubiquitous weak magnetic fields (~  100 G), entangled at sub-granular length scales. The apparent absence of variation of the scattering polarization signals with the solar cycle could be evidence for a local origin of these turbulent magnetic fields through granular dynamo action. Also, MHD models by [\citet=voeglerdynamo] conjecture the existence of such a local dynamo in the solar photosphere. However, observations by [\citet=Biandavar] clearly show significant variations in several lines of the Second Solar Spectrum with the solar cycle. Also, the polarimetric calibration accuracy of the currently available data-sets of the Second Solar Spectrum is insufficient for carefully comparing results obtained on different days or with different instruments and to unambiguously investigate the relation of the weak, turbulent fields to the global solar dynamo. Moreover, more extensive statistics of scattering polarization signals is required in order to develop a more complete picture of solar magnetism. Therefore the need for a dedicated instrument to measure the Second Solar Spectrum accurately is obvious. It is required that such an instrument can reach a polarimetric sensitivity of ~  10- 5 in order to distinguish the weak signals of the Second Solar Spectrum and that it is able to reproduce the polarimetric scale at an accuracy level of ~  2%. The instrument needs to be autonomous and fully automated in order to furnish daily measurements without interfering with operations at a major solar facility. We choose to operate in the wavelength range 415-465 nm, where a large concentration of prominent lines and features in the Second Solar Spectrum is to be found [\citep=atlas].

The Theta Cell

Traditionally, the Second Solar Spectrum is obtained by positioning a straight spectrograph slit at μ = 0.1 in a quiet region of a highly magnified solar image. A large-aperture telescope is necessary in order to obtain a sufficient photon flux for precision polarimetry, as it is impossible to average over large fractions of the solar limb within one observation. Such averaging leads to cancelation of the scattering polarization signals, since those are oriented parallel to the local limb direction, i.e. azimuthally on the solar disk. Utilizing a passive twisted nematic liquid crystal component known as a radial polarization converter or "theta cell" [\citep=thetacell], it is possible to convert the polar coordinate system of scattering polarization on the solar disk to one global Cartesian system. In other words, the local direction of Stokes Q parallel to the limb is transformed everywhere into an overall direction of Stokes Q, which in turn can be measured by a single linear polarimeter. Note that with this configuration only one linear Stokes parameter needs to be determined, instead of both Stokes Q and U as is the general case for the azimuthal orientation of linear scattering polarization signals. With such a theta cell in prime focus, only a small-aperture telescope is necessary to deliver the photon flux for measuring the Second Solar Spectrum averaged over the entire limb. Also the need for large magnification and hence a long focal length is no longer there to make to limb curvature much larger than the slit length. After selection of the limb regions of the synoptic solar image, all the relevant light can be polarimetrically analyzed and consecutively fed into a spectrograph. Therefore, the use of a theta cell reduces the required telescope size dramatically and gives rise to the design of the Small Synoptic Second Solar Spectrum Telescope (S5T).

Optical Design

The optical design of the S5T is schematically depicted in figure [\ref=optdes] for both the realized prototype and for the full instrument. The design is optimized for precision polarimetry with a minimal amount of instrumental polarization.

The sequential optical components are: No calibration components have been developed for the prototype. In order to ensure the accuracy and stability of the final instrument, a number of calibration procedures are foreseen: A rotating polarizer can be inserted at position b. of figure [\ref=optdes] in order to calibrate the polarimeter. In order to measure the instrumental polarization due to the two fused silica lenses and to check for degradation of the theta cell, also a rotatable polarizer can be inserted before the objective lens at position a. By using the spectrograph in imaging mode, i.e. taking spectra of each individual fiber in the bundle, the polarization rotation properties of the theta cell can be measured.

Prototype Results

The prototype of S5T was designed and constructed within the first half of 2007. The optical components 3-12 of figure [\ref=optdes] were aligned within a 60 cm long box with an attached tube of 1 m length to hold the objective lens. The entire assembly was attached to a tripod with a motorized equatorial mount. Pointing was performed manually, using a quad cell behind a separate pinhole camera as a reference signal. The prototype was set-up at the old Utrecht observatory "Sonnenborgh", next to the heliostat that has been used for pioneering work on the ("first") solar spectrum [\citep=Minnaert]. The first results are presented in figure [\ref=S5Tresults] and compared to the Second Solar Spectrum from the atlas of [\citet=atlas] after smearing with a 0.5 Å Gaussian. The data has been dark-subtracted and Fourier-filtered in order to remove polarized spectral fringes originating from the liquid crystal devices. It is clear that within 4 minutes the prototype reached a polarimetric sensitivity at the 10- 5 level and observed the scattering polarization signals of the Ca  4227, the Ba  4554 and the Sr  4607 lines. Also a number of deep Fe  lines show up in the polarimetric data, whereas they are absent in the atlas. Initial tests on the data show that these signals can not be due to bias drift or coupling of the fringe pattern to the camera non-linearity cf. [\citet=nonlin]. In the future, also "null" measurements have to be taken by rotating the FLC to modulate Stokes U only. This way, the Fe  lines' signals can be determined to be instrumental or solar in origin and also the spectral fringes can be measured independently.

Outlook

The final instrument is fully funded by NOVA (The Dutch research school for astronomy) as of November 2007 and will be designed, constructed, tested and commissioned in the course of the next two years. It will be mounted at the fourth instrument platform of SOLIS at Kitt Peak, AZ, USA. In the mean-time, the prototype will be used for further tests. It will be updated in order to be able to observe the polarization of the flash spectrum during the 2009 solar eclipse over China.