The Effect of Electrical Boundary Conditions on the Thermal Properties of Ferroelectric Piezoelectric Ceramics

Piezoelectric materials are a unique class of materials in which the electrical and mechanical properties are coupled. The most popular piezoelectric material is lead-zirconate-titanate (PZT) due to its large electromechanical properties and the adaptability of its properties with dopants.

It is well known that the electrical boundary conditions and poling affect the elastic compliance of piezoelectric materials.1 The thermal properties, namely thermal conductivity, may also be expected to be affected by electrical boundary conditions and poling due to the fact that this property and elastic compliance both arise primarily from phonon mode phenomena.

The thermal properties of PZT ceramics have been studied at low temperature (20K-300K), and a transition temperature was found between 50K and 80K.2 It has also been studied at high temperature, between 300K-800K, which characterizes the affect of phase transition on the thermal properties.3 However, the relationship of thermal properties with electrical boundary conditions and poling in PZT and other ferroelectric piezoelectric ceramics has not been studied.

Using the experiment outlined in4, which uses a time constant formulation to determine thermal properties, the thermal diffusivity α of a poled and depoled commercially available hard PZT ceramic discs, APC 841 (APC Int., USA), of a diameter of 51 mm was measured. The thermal diffusivity was measured in the direction of polarization for the poled samples. Using the DSC Q2000 (TA Instruments), the absolute value heat capacity of a small sample was measured by comparing it to a sapphire reference sample. The heat capacity and density are respectively [formula] ρ  =  7600[formula]. The heat capacity is not affected by electrical boundary conditions and it is a scalar property; therefore, the thermal conductivity κ can be determined from the thermal diffusivity α and from the heat capacity cp

[formula]

The original report regarding the TC thermal diffusivity experiment presented a standard deviation of less than 5%. However, the results of this experiment had larger deviation (Tab. 1) due to the fact that the diameters of the samples were a few millimeters smaller than the sample holder. The error found is different for different boundary conditions and poling states, but this is believed to be random.

The measured thermal diffusivity and thermal conductivity values for poled open circuit, poled short circuit, and depoled samples are described in Tab. [\ref=tab:Thermal-diffusivity-and] as an average of two measurements on three samples each. samples were depoled by heating them and then checking their response on a d33 meter. The short circuit thermal conductivity κE33 is more than 1.5 times larger than the open circuit one κD33. The unpoled thermal conductivity κu showed the smallest value, 15% less than that of the open circuit case. The relationship between the open circuit κD33 and short circuit thermal conductivity κE33 can be described by a electrothermal coupling coefficient

[formula]

which is closely related to the relationship1 between short circuit and open circuit elastic compliance and the electromechanical coupling coefficient k33

[formula]

The electromechanical coupling factor of this ceramic found from electrical impedance spectroscopy is k33  =  0.68. Using Eq. [\ref=eq:kappa], the "electrothermal" coupling factor can be calculated to be kκ33  =  0.63. The error between the two coupling factors may be due to error in the thermal measurements and possibly other microscopic features which do not correlate between the k value determined from electrical and thermal measurements.

In summary, κE33  >  κD33  >  κu. This may be understood from phonon mode scattering, orientation of domains, and elastic compliance. Because of the random orientation of domains in the depoled sample, it is expected that there will be the most phonon scattering in this material. Therefore, it will have the lowest thermal conductivity. Because the domains of the poled material are oriented, less scattering is expected and thermal conductivity will be larger for the poled material (κE33 and κD33). The elastic compliance under short circuit conditions sE33 is softer than the elastic compliance under open circuit conditions sD33. This means that the lattice and domain wall motion are larger in the short circuit condition. The larger lattice vibration and domain motion in short circuit conditions will also correlate to a larger thermal conductivity in short circuit conditions κE33 due to increased phonon mode transport. This observation can also be used to understand the relation between k33 and kκ33

The clear result of the experiments is that thermal conductivity in ferroelectric ceramics depends on electrical boundary conditions. It is very possible that the electromechanical coupling factor in these materials is related to thermal properties as well, namely thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity. A discussion was presented to explain the behavior using phonon scattering and domain orientation concepts. Future work includes studying the effect of microstructure on phonon mode transport in these materials and further clarifying the thermal-electrical coupling experimentally demonstrated in the experiments.

Bibliography

1B. Jaffe, W.R. Cook Jr., and H. Jaffe. Piezoelectric Ceramics, London, (Academic Press, 1971)

2S. Yarlagadda, M. Chan, H. Lee, G.A. Lesieutre, D.W. Jensen, and R. S. Messer. "Low temperature thermal conductivity, heat capacity, and heat generation of PZT." Journal of intelligent material systems and structures, 6.6, 757-764 (1995)

3S.N. Kallaev, G.G. Gadzhiev, I.K. Kamilov, Z.M. Omarov, S.A. Sadykov, and L.A. Reznichenko. "Thermal properties of PZT-based ferroelectric ceramics." Physics of the Solid State, 48.6, 1169-1170 (2006)

4Shekhani, H.N., and Uchino, K. "Thermal diffusivity measurements using insulating and isothermal boundary conditions." Review of Scientific Instruments, 85.1, 015117 (2014)