The ASDC SED Builder Tool description and Tutorial

Introduction

Spectral Energy Distributions (SEDs) are commonly used in contemporary multi-wavelength astronomy because they are considered to be a powerful instrument to study the physical properties of astrophysical sources by providing a direct comparison of source luminosities in different energy bands.

The ASDC SED Builder tool has been developed at the ASI Science Data Center (ASDC) to allow web users to easily browse and combine multi-wavelength data to produce a SED of any cosmic source. There are several catalogs in the ASDC databases, which are periodically updated; transparent queries to external services can also be performed.

In particular, many high energy astronomy catalogs are available (e.g. Fermi, AGILE, Swift XRT). For these catalogs data are often not available in physical units but rather in count rates measured by specific instruments. In these cases, data are converted to fluxes taking into account the instrument response and assuming a spectral model. This operation is done for each catalog containing count rates. The correction for the Galactic absorption is also applied.

The tool, based on a Java code and a MySQL database system, provides different functionalities and several plot options for the analysis of the SEDs. The possibility to filter the data in time intervals will be added to the next version, thus enabling the construction of time resolved SEDs suitable for variability studies.

The need for a SED builder tool has been listed among the priorities of the International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA). For this reason some groups are planning specific tools for the near future (e.g. D'Abrusco et al. 2010, arXiv:1012.5733). On our side, we plan to make the ASDC SED Builder VO compliant within a few months, starting by adding the option to save the SED data as VO table and to query the VO registry.

Building SEDs

Given a selected astrophysical source, flux information at several wavelengths necessary for the SED building are gathered browsing through several missions and experiments databases, both ground and space-based. To achieve this goal, the ASDC SED Builder welcome page (http://tools.asdc.asi.it/SED/) redirects the user to a dedicated query page from which the source name or coordinates can be specified. Some specific information for that object such as the name and sky coordinates will be displayed at the bottom of the page. Note that the result of a search through sky coordinates depends strongly on the search radius (1 arcmin by default) and it can produce more than one entry.

All catalogs containing the queried coordinates are loaded by default for the SED building (see an example in Figure 1 for the bright quasar 3C279). The user can refine the input data by selecting/deselecting different catalogs, by changing the search radius of each catalog and by using several plotting options.

SED Input Data

Input data are divided in three different categories:

Local Catalogs

The ASDC Team supplies the user with a list of local catalogs grouped by frequency ranges: radio, infrared, optical, X-ray and gamma-ray

External Catalogs

Data provided by external multi-wavelength databases/surveys, such as NED, 2Mass, USNO, and SDSS

User Catalogs

Proprietary data/catalogs, handled in a dedicated area, can be uploaded

A dedicated "User Data" area enables to upload and manage in a secure way proprietary (or any preferred) data. The user can upload single source or multiple sources new data using a simple ASCII file and following a simple syntax. After uploading and saving, the new set of data will be available as "User Catalogs". Proprietary data can be managed only by registered users and by default are not accessible to other users: however it is possible to share data with other groups and/or single users.

All loaded data can be visualized through an interactive table. All sources located within the circular region defined by the search radius of each catalog are listed in terms of sky coordinates, flux density and frequency. Each SED point can be selected/deselected from each table and the new configuration can be updated (e.g. to exclude a particular energy range). This operation is particularly useful to clean the obtained SED from spurious entries that may have been found in the automatic search procedure. Once cleaned, the built SED can be analyzed by the user in several ways directly from the tool.

SED Analysis

A number of functionalities are currently implemented in the ASDC SED Builder web tool to enable the user to manage input data and compare them to theoretical expectations or to the sensitivity curves of several instruments, by performing fit with simple analytical functions, by tailoring the plot settings, etc.

In the present version of ASDC SED Builder, two types of Synchrotron Self Compton emission model are available:

SSC Analytical provides an analytic solution of the emission model obtained through a number of approximations (developed by A. Pellizzoni and M. Perri). The model is based on a broken power law electron distribution.

SSC Numerical provides a more precise but somehow slower numerical approach to the model. It allows the user to choose among different electron distributions (e.g. power law, broken power law, log parabola, etc.). The user can select the model accuracy level and whether to consider or not the Synchrotron self-absorption component. Publications using this code should cite the following paper: A. Tramacere et al 2009, A&A, 501, 879.

Both Analytical and Numerical SSC models require the knowledge of the source redshift. The user can plot both models together over the data and sum existing single models creating a model grouping.

Two useful spectral templates are also provided: a composite QSO optical spectrum from SDSS (D.E. Vanden Berk, 2001, ApJ, 122,549) plus standard X-ray emission (radio to optical flux ratio is required) and a giant elliptical galaxy template (derived from Mannucci et al. 2001, MNRAS 326, 745). Polynomial functions can be fitted to the built SED, in any desired frequency range: the main goal of this functionality is to enable the user to estimate any peak flux value in the displayed SED, quoted as "Max value" at the bottom of the frame as soon as the fit has been performed.

The built SED can also be compared with the maximum sensitivity of several widely known instruments. By selecting each instrument, a sensitivity curve is displayed in the SED plot. We warn the user that an updating work of some instrument sensitivity curve is still in progress.

Registered users can save all built SEDs and SED analysis sessions in the "User data" area. The user can access directly to saved SEDs from the starting page of the ASDC SED Builder web tool. These SEDs and their analysis can be shared with other collaborators: this can be done by editing the SEDs in the "User Data" area and selecting the desired group/users to allow the access, however proprietary data are modifiable only by the first owner.

Finally, the built SEDs can be exported as ASCII file (QDP syntax) or as an image in Portable Network Graphic format. The user can play on a large number of settings (e.g. background color, dimension and color of each SED point, logarithmic or linear axis, observer or rest frame at a given redshift, etc.)

The next versions of the ASDC SED Builder web tool will enable time dependent SED analysis and will be improved in a number of functionalities focused towards a complete VO compliant version.

Appendix