A quantum fluid of metallic hydrogen suggested by first-principles calculations Stanimir A. Bonev[\cite=presadr], Eric Schwegler, Tadashi Ogitsu & Giulia Galli Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, University of California, Livermore, California 94550 It is generally assumed[\cite=4] [\cite=5] [\cite=mao] that solid hydrogen will transform into a metallic alkali-like crystal at sufficiently high pressure. However, some theoretical models[\cite=6] [\cite=10] have also suggested that compressed hydrogen may form an unusual two-component (protons and electrons) metallic fluid at low temperature, or possibly even a zero-temperature liquid ground state. The existence of these new states of matter is conditional on the presence of a maximum in the melting temperature versus pressure curve (the 'melt line'). Previous measurements[\cite=1] [\cite=2] [\cite=3] of the hydrogen melt line up to pressures of 44 GPa have led to controversial conclusions regarding the existence of this maximum. Here we report ab initio calculations that establish the melt line up to 200 GPa. We predict that subtle changes in the intermolecular interactions lead to a decline of the melt line above 90 GPa. The implication is that as solid molecular hydrogen is compressed, it transforms into a low-temperature quantum fluid before becoming a monatomic crystal. The emerging low-temperature phase diagram of hydrogen and its isotopes bears analogies with the familiar phases of 3He and 4He, the only known zero-temperature liquids, but the long-range Coulombic interactions and the large component mass ratio present in hydrogen would ensure dramatically different properties[\cite=7] [\cite=babaev].

The possible existence of low-temperature liquid phases of compressed hydrogen has been rationalized with arguments based on the nature of effective pair interactions and of the quantum dynamics at high density, resulting in proton-proton correlations insufficient for the stabilization of a crystalline phase[\cite=10]. But so far there has been no conclusive evidence establishing whether hydrogen metallizes at low temperature as a solid (the more widely accepted view to date) or as a liquid. Measurements and theoretical predictions of the near-ground state high-pressure phases[\cite=mao] of hydrogen have proven to be difficult because of the light atomic mass, significant quantum effects and strong electron-ion interactions. In this regard, the finite temperature liquid-solid phase boundary predicted here is especially valuable for understanding the manner in which hydrogen metallizes.

The appearance of a maximum melting temperature in hydrogen is in itself a manifestation of an unusual physical phenomenon. The few systems with a negative melt slope involve either open crystalline structures, such as water and graphite, or in the case of closed packed solids, a promotion of valence electrons to higher orbitals upon compression (6s to 5d in cesium[\cite=9], for example). In these cases, the liquid is denser than the solid when they coexist, possibly because of structural or electronic transitions taking place continuously in the liquid, as a function of pressure, but only at discrete pressure intervals in the solid.

In contrast, recent experiments[\cite=3] have shown that hydrogen phase I - a solid structure with rotationally-free molecules associated with the sites of a hexagonal closed packed (hcp) lattice - persists below the liquid transition up to at least 150 GPa, i.e. well beyond the melt curve maximum predicted here. The promotion of electrons to higher orbitals in hydrogen can also be ruled out because of the prohibitive high energy involved. Alternatively, it has been suggested that dissociation in the fluid, either gradual[\cite=2] or following a first-order liquid-liquid (LL) phase transition[\cite=11] [\cite=12], may be the origin of a maximum in the melt line. This idea is not supported by our results. Instead, we explain the physical origin of the maximum in terms of changes in the intermolecular interactions - a mechanism significantly different from that expected from familiar phenomenological models.

The approach taken here to compute the melt line is one of direct simulation of the melting process. Hysteresis effects of super-heating or super-cooling during the phase transition are avoided by simulating solid and liquid phases in coexistence. The validity of this method is then assessed by reducing size effects in such a way that realistic thermodynamic processes can be mimicked. This technique, known as two-phase simulation, has been mostly applied with model potentials[\cite=14], thus allowing the simulation of large systems, and only recently it was demonstrated[\cite=15] [\cite=16] that implementations within the framework of first principles molecular dynamics (MD) are feasible.

Two-phase simulations (Fig. 1) are performed for various pressure and temperature conditions to predict the melt curve of hydrogen up to 200 GPa (Fig. 2). As discussed in Refs. [\cite=2] and [\cite=3], the experimental data available up to 44 GPa can be equally well fitted with several empirical melt equations, leading to qualitatively different conclusions regarding the further rise or fall of the phase boundary. Our results at 50 GPa compare favourably with recent measurement[\cite=3], and the calculations at 130 and 200 GPa predict a negative slope in this pressure region.

Previous first-principles calculations[\cite=11] [\cite=19] indicated the existence of a sharp transition from molecular to non-molecular fluid, thus raising the possibility that the melt curve maximum is a liquid-liquid-solid triple point. We therefore studied the properties of the liquid at temperatures above melting. In our simulations, we do find a first-order liquid-liquid phase transition from molecular to dissociating fluid, but this occurs at temperatures higher than those of the melting line; at 200 GPa, the liquid-liquid transition takes place between 900 and 1,000 K (Fig. 2). Thus, in the entire pressure range considered here, the liquid remains molecular below 900 K, with molecules stable over the simulation times of several picoseconds. We emphasize that on heating above a critical temperature, the transition to a non-molecular fluid takes place very rapidly, over a couple of hundred femtoseconds of simulation time. When the fluid is subsequently quenched, the molecules recombine and the system reverts to the molecular state. Therefore, we conclude that the change from a positive to a negative melt line slope happens gradually and we emphasize that it is not directly related to molecular dissociation. However, extrapolations of the melt line and the liquid-liquid phase transition indicate a triple point at ~  300 GPa and 400 K. Above this pressure, the solid is expected to melt into a metallic liquid.

To estimate the errors originating from finite system size effects, we have computed the ground state pressure and energy for different size simulation cells sampled at the the Γ-point and with a 2x2x2 k-point mesh. The pressure and energy differences between the solid and the liquid are converged to within 0.3 GPa and 1 meV per ion, and the estimated errors are included in Fig. 3. A question that remains to be answered is whether the size of the system considered here is sufficient to simulate liquid-solid coexistence. To address this, we carried out MD simulations of single-phase solid and liquid hydrogen at the melting temperatures determined in the two-phase simulations. The differences in the specific volumes and enthalpies obtained in this way (Fig. 3) are then used to compute the melt slopes using the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. The agreement with the results from two-phase simulations gives us confidence that the computed melt curve is thermodynamically consistent.

We also discuss the validity of the principal approximations in our theoretical method: (1) adiabatic interactions, (2) the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) for the exchange-correlation energy, and (3) classical treatment of ion motion. Electron-phonon interactions are significant in the solid phase when the direct band gap is comparable with the phonon frequencies; an event that eventually occurs at high densities. But at 200 GPa and 600 K - the conditions examined here where the electron-phonon coupling is expected to be most pronounced - the GGA band gap is still ~  2 eV. We note that the GGA tends to systematically underestimate band gaps; this has been shown for various materials, including hydrogen[\cite=czl92]. However, because the highest vibrational frequencies in hydrogen are ~  0.5 eV, the computed GGA band gap - a lower bound to the actual value - is already sufficient to establish that non-adiabatic effects are indeed negligible.

Local density approximations are also expected to favour the phase with more delocalised electrons; previous studies have shown a consistent tendency of the GGA to underestimate melting temperatures, such as those of lithium hydride[\cite=15] and aluminium[\cite=16]. Here, this effect is expected to be very small because the molecular bonding properties and the atomic coordination differ little in the solid and liquid phases. This also implies that the zero-point energy bound in the vibron motion is similar in the two phases. Indeed, velocity-velocity autocorrelation analysis carried out on our MD trajectories shows that vibron frequency distributions (containing all vibrational modes) differ by less than 10 cm- 1 in the solid and the liquid between 50 and 200 GPa. In addition, we have computed the first-order quantum correction to the ionic free energies. It is given by the Wigner-Kirkwood formula, [formula], where the average is over the classical ensemble, and [formula] and mi are the ionic forces and masses. The difference in the quantum corrections for the two phases obtained in this way at pressures of 50, 130 and 200 GPa remains less than 2 meV for temperatures near the computed melt curve.

We now turn our attention to the physical origin of the maximum in the melt curve of hydrogen. The transition from an ordered to a disordered state is governed by the relative importance of entropy and energy. At high pressure, the interactions become mostly repulsive, and it is reasonable to expect that a deviation from a crystalline arrangement becomes progressively more unfavourable in terms of enthalpy. This is indeed the case for most materials, as is reflected in the positive slopes of their melt curves. On the other hand, attractive many-body interactions can soften the steep increase of the repulsive forces at high density[\cite=hmf90] [\cite=nbb03]. Although, in principle, such a softening opens up the possibility for a melt curve maximum[\cite=yoshida], it does not appear to be a sufficient condition for its existence. Indeed, softening of the repulsive part of the pair potentials has been observed for a number of materials for which there is no experimental indication of a melt line turnover. As will be shown below, the physics behind the unique melt curve of hydrogen is related to the different rate at which the repulsive interactions (at intermolecular range) are weakened in the solid and liquid phases as a function of pressure.

To investigate how many-body interactions give rise to repulsive force softening in the liquid and the solid, we have performed an analysis based on maximally-localized Wannier functions (MLWF). These functions have been shown[\cite=marzari] to provide an intuitive description of chemical bonds in condensed phases and they have recently been used[\cite=souza] to investigate the infrared activity of candidate structures of hydrogen phase III. We have computed MLWF along the 700 K isotherm, at various pressures, and find that their spreads (Fig. 4) increase faster in the fluid than in the solid, as the system is compressed. Importantly, the differences in the two phases come from the tails of the MLWF, while their profiles around the centres of the molecular bonds remain nearly the same. Therefore, the large MLWF spread observed in the high-pressure fluid comes from the increased overlap of the molecular orbitals, here represented by the MLWF. Because the specific volumes of the solid and the liquid are very similar under the conditions examined here, the physical origin of the larger spread in the fluid can be attributed to the disorder in the liquid phase. Furthermore, the tails of the MLWF in the fluid are characterized by an asymmetry, which can be viewed as an effective intermolecular charge transfer, giving rise to an enhanced infrared activity in the liquid phase.

The properties of the MLWF found in our calculations are indicative of the behaviour of repulsive interactions in the solid and liquid as a function of pressure. Effective hydrogen-hydrogen pair potentials derived from our ab initio MD trajectories using a force matching technique[\cite=ipb04] are displayed in the inset of Fig. 4. As in the MLWF behaviour, we observe a stronger softening of the potential in the liquid than in the solid. Our Wannier function analysis indicates that this increased softening is the result of charge transfer processes, enhanced by disorder, which appear to have a qualitative character similar to those proposed in Ref. [\cite=hemley] for phase III of solid hydrogen. We also note that the attenuation of repulsive interactions observed here in the solid phase correlates well with the analysis of Raman spectroscopic data[\cite=silvera2], which has indicated softening of the effective intermolecular force constants above ~  100 GPa.

To summarize, we have predicted the melt curve of hydrogen between 50 and 200 GPa from first principles. Above approximately 82 GPa, the melt line has a negative slope - a phenomenon that we have related to softening of the intermolecular interactions, which occur at a faster rate in the liquid than in the solid, as a function of pressure. Our results provide strong evidence that above ~  300 GPa the solid melts into a metallic liquid and that a low-temperature metallic quantum fluid will exist at pressures near 400 GPa. Although we have only directly probed temperatures as low as 600 K, our conclusions are likely to hold at lower temperatures as well. Indeed, quantum ion motion usually favours phases with lower ion-ion correlations, which would further stabilize the low-temperature liquid phase found here. In addition, our findings are consistent with pressure estimates from experiments where hydrogen is expected to metallize[\cite=mao] [\cite=lot]. Finally, we note that the observed increase in MLWF spreads when going from the high-pressure solid to the molecular liquid phase points at the presence of dynamically-induced intermolecular charge transfer (dipole moments); this indicates that the transition from solid to liquid at high pressure is accompanied by an increase of the hydrogen infrared absorption. Therefore, we propose that measurements of infrared activity could be used to verify experimentally the predicted turnover of the melt curve.

Methods

Molecular dynamics Our ab initio MD simulations are carried out with the GP code, written by F. Gygi, and using the Car-Parrinello (CP) method[\cite=20]; the many-body electron problem was solved quantum-mechanically within the generalized gradient approximation[\cite=21] of density functional theory, while the ions are propagated classically (the validity of this approximation for the problem at hand is discussed in the text). The actual calculations are performed for deuterium instead of hydrogen. The reason for this is that in the classical-ion picture, for the quantities of relevance here there is no distinction between hydrogen and its isotopes, but the substitution with heavier ions allows us to integrate the equations of motion with reasonably large time steps: 2 and 3 a.u. (1 a.u. = 0.0242 fs) depending on the density. Furthermore, we use a Γ-point sampling of the Brillouin zone, Troullier-Martins pseudopotentials, and 60 Ry energy cut-off for the plane wave expansion of the Kohn-Sham orbitals. The accuracy and transferability of our pseudopotential has previously been extensively tested[\cite=19]. We have explicitly verified that the electrons remain near the Born-Oppenheimer surface throughout the simulations by comparing pressures determined in the CP runs with those determined by fully optimizing wavefunctions for the same ionic trajectories. The use of CP-MD results in a systematic shift of about 0.5 GPa both in the solid and liquid phases.

Two-phase simulations We perform the two-phase simulations by equilibrating solid (in the hcp structure) and liquid phases separately in 360-atom supercells with fixed geometry and applied periodic boundary conditions. The atomic arrangements obtained in this way are then merged, and the liquid and solid parts of the resulting 720-atom supercells are also heated independently to reduce the strain near the newly-formed interface. The whole equilibration process typically lasts for several picoseconds of simulation time. The MD runs of coexisting phases are then performed in the N - P - T ensemble (constant number of particles, pressure and temperature respectively). The actual system being simulated initially represents semi-infinite alternating slabs (by applying periodic boundary conditions) of solid and liquid, but by the end of the runs only one of the two phases, the one that is stable at the chosen P and T, fills the entire volume.

Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge S. Izvekov for providing the force-matching routines that were used in analysis shown in the inset of Figure 4, and F. Gygi for many useful discussions. This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Dept. of Energy at the University of California/Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.A.B. (bonev1@llnl.gov).