PRAXIS - a low background NIR spectrograph for fibre Bragg grating OH suppression

Anthony Horton et al, "PRAXIS: a low background NIR spectrograph for fibre Bragg grating OH suppression", Modern Technologies in Space- and Ground-based Telescopes and Instrumentation II, Proc. SPIE 8450, 84501V (2012)

Copyright 2012 Society of Photo Optical Instrumentation Engineers. One print or electronic copy may be made for personal use only. Systematic electronic or print reproduction and distribution, duplication of any material in this paper for a fee or for commercial purposes, or modification of the content of the paper are prohibited.

INTRODUCTION

Fibre Bragg grating OH suppression is a high performance optical filter technology. A fibre Bragg grating (FBG) is a length of single mode fibre with refractive index variations along the axis which cause specific wavelengths to be reflected. Aperiodic FBGs can be used to create multi-notch filters with large numbers of narrow, deep, square profiled notches while retaining high interline throughput, exactly the properties required for effective filtering of the OH emission lines that dominate the near infrared sky background[\cite=Bland-Hawthorn2004]. The current state of the art allows for over 100 notches at a resolution of R  ≈  10000, depths of over 30dB, profiles well fit by n = 5 Butterworth functions and interline throughput of over 90% [\cite=Trinh2012]. The single mode fibres (SMFs) required for FBGs generally cannot be used directly in astronomical applications because of low coupling efficiencies however devices known as photonic lanterns (PLs) enable arrays of FBGs (or other single mode photonic devices) to be used be used with multimode input and output[\cite=Leon-Saval2005a].

FBG OH suppression is capable of greatly reducing the bright sky background observed by near infrared spectrographs. By filtering out the OH emission lines before the light enters the spectrograph this technique prevents the scattering of light from the emission lines into interline regions and as a result has the ability to reduce the background at all wavelengths[\cite=Ellis2008]. The effectiveness of this background suppression clearly has the potential to significantly increase the sensitivity of ground based near infrared spectroscopy however in order to fulfil this potential the spectrographs must have very low instrumental backgrounds so that they remain sky background noise limited. Simulations as well as real world experience gained during the commissioning of the GNOSIS system with the IRIS2 spectrograph on the AAT[\cite=Ellis2012] [\cite=Trinh2012] suggest that existing spectrographs, optimised for much higher sky background levels, will be unable to fully exploit the benefits FBG OH suppression. A purpose built, specialised spectrograph is required and for that reason we plan to built PRAXIS.

DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

The design of a spectrograph intended for use with FBG OH suppression must consider several key factors.

Dark Current

Simulations comparing the various sources of background signals in FBG OH suppressed spectrographs predict that detector dark current will be a significant contributor and care must be taken to minimise it in order to prevent the associated Poisson noise limiting the sensitivity of the instrument. Results from GNOSIS, a prototype FBG OH suppression system which used the existing IRIS2 spectrograph on the Anglo-Australian Telescope, illustrate the potential impact of dark current. Figure [\ref=fig:GNOSIS_background] shows the background levels observed by GNOSIS, as reported by Ellis et al[\cite=Ellis2012]. The PACE HAWAII-1 HgCdTe detector used in IRIS2 has a measured dark current of 0.015 e-s- 1pixel- 1 however even this relatively low value is sufficient to dominate the observed background for wavelengths less than 1.67 m. There are two main factors effecting the impact of dark current, detector selection and spectral format.

There are large differences in dark current levels between different near infrared detector arrays, InSb and first generation (PACE) HgCdTe detectors have dark currents ranging from a few e-s- 1pixel- 1 to ~  10- 2 e-s- 1pixel- 1. The current generation of MBE HgCdTe detectors are able to achieve significantly lower dark currents, however. Dark currents of ~  2  ×  10- 3 e-s- 1pixel- 1 have been measured for 2.5 m cutoff devices and it is expected that with sufficient cooling dark currents of ~  10- 3 e-s- 1pixel- 1 are possible for the 1.75 m cutoff detectors[\cite=Blank2011]. The majority of infrared astronomical spectrographs currently in service use InSb or PACE HgCdTe detectors but without the order of magnitude reduction in dark current offered by a MBE HgCdTe detector it would be difficult for a spectrograph with FBG OH suppression to avoid being detector noise limited.

The spectral format on the detector is also important, minimising the number of pixels over which the signal from the sky is spread minimises the contribution of dark current. There are three aspects to this, all of which should be followed by an optimised spectrograph. First, the spectral resolution should be the minimum that meets the science requirements for the instrument. Note that because the OH lines are filtered out at high resolution (R  ~  10000) before entering the spectrograph an instrument with FBG OH suppression is able to use lower resolutions than a spectrograph without OH suppression provided that the resolution is sufficient to achieve the science objectives. Second, the pixel scale of the spectrograph should be chosen to just critically sample the spectral resolution element, i.e. the fibre images should subtend a diameter of [formula] pixels on the detector. Third, the spectrograph should minimise the number of pixels in the spatial direction.

There is another factor effecting the impact of detector noise on the spectrograph and that is the AΩ product or étendue per fibre, the higher the AΩ the higher the surface brightness on the detector and the higher the ratio between signal and dark current. The AΩ per fibre is not usually determined by the spectrograph design however, it is generally constrained by other factors. At the input of the observing system the AΩ per fibre can be equated to the product of the collecting area of the telescope and the solid angle on the sky that each fibre aperture projects to. The former is clearly fixed for a given telescope while the latter will often be determined by the typical angular size of the targets that will be observed, or the features of interest within them. In the case of the FBG OH suppression there is also a technological constraint on the AΩ per fibre due to the properties of photonic lanterns. A photonic lantern will only transmit light below a maximum AΩ which is determined by the number of SMFs in the lantern. For a given photonic lantern the maximum field of view per fibre on sky, θmax, can be approximated by

[formula]

where N is the number of SMFs, λ is the wavelength and Dtel is the telescope diameter. The GNOSIS FBG OH suppression system has 19 SMFs per photonic lantern, operates over the wavelength range 1.47-1.70 m and was installed on the 3.9 m AAT, this gives a maximum field of view per fibre of approximately 0.4 arcseconds. This is somewhat smaller than ideal given the typical seeing at the site however budget and timescale constraints limited the size of the photonic lanterns that could be considered at the time. Photonic lanterns with 61 SMFs, which would allow 1.8  ×   the AΩ per fibre, have already been demonstrated[\cite=Noordegraaf2010a] and developments in multicore fibre and integrated optics photonic lanterns promise to make large values of N readily achievable[\cite=Min2012] [\cite=Haynes2012] [\cite=Spaleniak2012] in the near future. A spectrograph designed for FBG OH suppression should have collimator and camera optics with sufficiently fast focal ratios to accommodate the beam angles associated with the maximum AΩ values of the photonic lanterns it will be used with.

Thermal Background

As with dark current low levels of instrument thermal background are required in order for a spectrograph to remain sky noise limited with FBG OH suppression. As can been seen in figure [\ref=fig:GNOSIS_background] the GNOSIS FBG OH suppression system exhibited a significant instrument thermal background component, high enough to be the dominant source of background for wavelengths longer than 1.67 m. The main source of this background is believed to be H-band thermal emission from the fibre slit. Because GNOSIS was fitted to an existing spectrograph that was not designed to be fibre fed it was necessary to use a fibre slit outside the spectrograph dewar and feed the spectrograph via an optical relay. The thermal emission from the uncooled fibre slit is difficult to effectively baffle without vignetting the light path from the fibres themselves. An infrared spectrograph designed to be fibre fed from the outset can substantially reduce instrument thermal background by positioning the fibre slit inside the dewar. This eliminates the need for a dewar window, reduces the number of warm optical elements in the optical path, and of course greatly reduces emission from the fibre slit itself.

Throughput

High throughput is obviously advantageous for any spectrograph but this is especially true in the case of intrinsically low signal levels combined with significant levels of instrument background (dark current and thermal). The most important factor in determining the throughput of the spectrograph is the choice of dispersive element, for example the surface relief grism used in IRIS2 has an H-band peak diffraction efficiency of approximately 40% whereas volume phase holographic gratings would be expected to give over twice that. Compared to general purpose near infrared spectrographs an instrument designed for FBG OH suppression can make further throughput gains by optimising the optical design and coatings for a single format and reduced wavelength range (J & H-bands only).

Versatility

Fibre Bragg grating OH suppression systems are still under active development, therefore important a spectrograph that can be used to test a number of different OH suppression units is needed. Likewise in order to maximise the opportunities for telescope time the spectrograph should be usable with any large optical telescope. These requirements suggest a modular approach with interchangeable front end components (fore optics, integral field units, OH suppression units) which allow the spectrograph itself to be used unmodified on different telescopes and with different OH suppression unit designs. The spectrograph itself should be largely self-sufficient in operation, requiring only standard services such as electrical power and coolant supplies.

INSTRUMENT CONCEPT

The PRAXIS instrument concept is illustrated in figure [\ref=fig:PRAXIS_schematic]. It consists of the following components:

STATUS & PLANS

At the time of writing the instrument concept is currently under development. Funding is available for the spectrograph and fibre components however, and prototyping and testing of critical fibre components such as the vaccuum feedthroughs, cryogenic slit and fibre connectors will begin this year. Several options are currently being investigated for obtaining access to a suitable HgCdTe detector. The aim is for PRAXIS to be completed and commissioning in 2013.