Distances and classification of amino acids for different protein secondary structures

Introduction

The similarity of amino acids(aa) is the basis of protein sequence alignment, protein design and protein structure prediction. Several scoring schemes have been proposed based on amino acid similarity. The mutation data matrices of Dayhoff [\cite=dhf] and the substitution matrices of Henikoff [\cite=hh] are standard choices of scores for sequence alignment and amino acid similarity evaluation. However, these matrices, focusing on the whole protein database, pay little attention on protein secondary structures(ss). How the amino acid similarity is influenced by different secondary structures is an interesting question. Furthermore, understanding the differences can help us in protein sequence analysis.

Despite efforts in uncovering the information encoded in the primary structure, we still cannot read the language describing the final 3D fold of an active biological macromolecule. Compared with the DNA sequence, a protein sequence is generally much shorter, but the size of the alphabet is five times larger. A proper coarse-graining of the 20 amino acids into fewer clusters for different conformation is important for improving the signal-to-noise ratio when extracting information by statistical means.

It is our purpose to propose a simple scheme to study amino acid similarity from amino acid string statistics. Information about the environment for an amino acid at a certain conformation state may be provided by statistics of residue strings or windows centered at the amino acid. The success of window-based approaches such as GOR [\cite=gor] for secondary structure prediction validates the use of such statistics. We shall derive a measure for the difference of amino acid pairs based on the distance of probability distributions, and investigate how the difference is dependent on conformations.

Amino acid distances

Our discussion will be heavily based on the distance between two probability distributions. A well defined measure of the distance is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) distance or relative entropy [\cite=kl] [\cite=kl1] [\cite=kl2], which, for two distributions {pi} and {qi}, is given by

[formula]

It corresponds a likelihood ratio, and, if pi is expanded around qi, its leading term is the χ2 distance:

[formula]

It is often to use the following symmetrized form for the KL distance

[formula]

The distributions to be considered here come from window statistics. For a given amino acid residue ai = x at the conformation state α in a sequence [formula], we take the string [formula] of width (2n + 1) as a window. Denote by Nk(y|x,α) the count of residue y at the k-th site from the center of such windows. As in GOR, only the conformation of the central residue is concerned. A quantity derived from Nk(y|x,α) is

[formula]

which, as the total count of residue x at the conformation α, is independent of k. The conditional probability distribution Pk(y|x,α) is estimated as

[formula]

The weight matrix [formula] with its entries being Pk(y|x,α) is the so-called residue profile of x at α. Such profiles are used in window-based approaches, e.g. GOR and artificial neural network algorithm [\cite=lapa].

We expect that on average the correlation between the central residue and an outer site decays when they become far apart in sequence. To examine the correlation, we consider a large window width of 21, i.e. n = 10, and take the 'noise' background to be the following average:

[formula]

The KL distance Dk;x,α({Pk(y|x,α)},{Q(y|x,α)}) provides a measure of the correlation between the central site and site k. As we shall see, for our purpose of amino acid comparison a narrow window of a strong correlation with width of 7 is used to describe amino acid enviroment.

Using distribution Pk(y|x,α) from window statistics to characterize amino acid residues, we define the distance of residue pair x and y at the same conformation α as the following sum of KL distances

[formula]

Similarly, to explore the difference of the same residue x at different conformations α and β, we may define the distance

[formula]

By means of the residue pair distances we can further study the classification of amino acids. With the KL distance, we may define the cluster distance in a way consistent with that for residue pairs. For example, we characterize the cluster consisting of residues x and y by the 'coarse-grained' probability

[formula]

We then may define the distance between this cluster and some other residues or clusters. With cluster distance defined, the cluster analysis can be used to reduce amino acid alphabets.

Results

Our analysis is performed on a data set taken from the database PDB_SELECT[\cite=pslt] [\cite=psltseq] of nonredundant protein sequences with known structures. The sequences share amino acid identity less than 25%. We keep only the non-membrane sequences with their lengths between 80 and 420. The secondary structure assignment is taken from the DSSP database [\cite=dssp]. As in GOR, we use the following reduction of the 8 DSSP states to 4 states of helix(h), sheet(e), coil(c) and turn(t): H,G,I  →  h, E  →  e, X,S,B  →  c and T  →  t. The counts of each amino acid at the reduced four different conformation states are given in Table 1.

We first estimate probability distributions of residues for each central residue at a given conformation. At this step, the window width is 21. We then calculate distances Dk;x,α({Pk(y|x,α)},{Q(y|x,α)}) of these distributions to their corresponding noise distributions. The results are shown in Figs. 1 to 4, each of which is for one conformation of the central residue. The 20 curves in each figure correspond to 20 central amino acids. Due to the sample size difference, curves are not directly comparable. (Roughly speaking, under the null hypothesis of identical distribution the χ2 distance should be scaled with the sample size, so a small sample size would give a relatively large distance.) However, a decay is clearly seen when the site k become far away from the center. For more discussions on correlations we refer reader to [\cite=weiss] [\cite=weiss1]. As seen from most curves of the figures, distances at the 6 sites nearest to the center are significantly larger than those at window border sites. We shall use window width of 7 for further comparison of amino acids.

It is natural to expect that similar residues would have similar window statistics. Thus, the KL distance between two residue profiles provides a measure of their similarity, i.e. a small KL distance implies a large similarity. We calculate the KL distance matrices Dxy;α for residue pairs at different conformations with formula ([\ref=dxy]). The results are given in Tables 2 and 3, where entries have been multiplied by a factor 200. With the distributions ([\ref=x+y]) defined for clusters, we further perform the simplest bottom-up approach of hierachical clustering for residues, by starting from 20 clusters of single residues, and then joining two nearest clusters step by step until a single cluster is obtained. The results of clustering are given in Tables 4 to 7. Since the dendritic trees returned from clustering are less informative, for visualization we introduce graphs where vertices are the 20 amino acids, and an edge exists between a pair of amino acids if and only if their distance is below some preset threshold. Graphs obtained from the distance matrices are shown in Figs. 5 to 8, where vertices with no connecting edges are neglected.

In sequence pair alignment we often do not have structure information of both sequences. With the structure information ignored, we have the mixed counts

[formula]

from which we calculate the residue pair distances averaged over conformations. The distance matrix obtained is given in Table 8. We have also calculated distances ([\ref=dab]) to compare different conformations. Distances between any two conformations for various residues are listed in Table 9.

Discussions

Figures 1 to 4 illustrate the dependence of outer sites in a window on the center. Although in the KL distance we sum up effects on individual residues from the center, we still can see the tendency that the center is generally more strongly correlated with the C-terminal sites than N-terminal sites. Furthermore, we may divide the 20 amino acids into two groups with M, I, L, V, F, Y and W in one, and the remainders in the other. They roughly correspond to hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups. It is seen that for the coil and turn conformations a hydrophobic center exhibits a stronger correlation with outer sites than a hydrophilic center, while for the sheet conformation a hydrophilic center exhibits a stronger correlation.

It is interesting to make a comparison between the distance matrices obtained here with the commonly used BLOSUM62 similarity score matrix. A small distance implies a large similarity score. There are many evidences showing the consistency between the distances and scores. For example, residue pairs VI, IL, VL and ST have positive BLOSUM scores and at the same time small distances. The graphs in Figs. 5 to 8 contain two connected subgraphs: one consists of I, L, V, F, Y, and the other consists of S, T. This is another evidence of the consistency. Generally, the averaged distance matrix is closer to BLOSUM62 than the conformation specific ones. However, there do exist some remarkable differences. For example, residue pairs GT, QA, FV with negative scores have rather small distances in either the conformation helix, or sheet or coil, while pairs YH and NH with positive scores have rather large distances in the helix conformation. Moreover, YH has a large distance in all the four conformations.

BLOSUM matrices are derived from conserved amino acid patterns called blocks. It is expected that for most score entries we should see the consistency in at least one conformation specific distance matrix. For a given residue pair, if residue profiles of an amino acid center are very dissimilar for different conformations, after averaging over conformations the pair distance would generally become smaller. In this case, BLOSUM scores and conformation specific distance need not be consistent since the former contains no structure information.

Our results show some strong dependence of residue behavior on conformations. For example, the distances of pairs CD and SI in helix are about twice higher than in sheet. There are many residue pairs displaying strong dependence of distances on conformations. Table 9 views the conformation dependence from conformation pair comparison. Indeed, the table indicates that for any conformation pairs there are certain residues which behave very differently in the two conformations. However, generally speaking, coil and turn are quite similar.

In comparison of physicochemical properties of amino acids, the abundance of amino acids is not taken into consideration. This is also the case for the above defined distances. Other statistical variables including the effect of sample size may be introduced. One candidate is the χ2 statistic for identical distributions. The analysis using this new statistic is under study.

We expect that algorithms using multiple conformation specific matrices should work better in sequence alignment. The popular Needleman-Wunsch algorithm can be modified to include putative conformation for each residue. This will be discussed elsewhere.

Table 1. Sample sizes of each amino acid residue in different protein secondary structures.

Table 2. Amino acid distance matrices for helices (bottom-left) and turns (top-right). Entries have been multiplied by a factor 200.

Table 3. Amino acid distance matrices for sheets (bottom-left) and coils (top-right). Entries have been multiplied by a factor 200.

Table 4. Clustering of amino acid alphabets for helices. The first column indicates the number of amino acid groups.

Table 5. Clustering of amino acid alphabets for sheets. The first column indicates the number of amino acid groups.

Table 6. Clustering of amino acid alphabets for coils. The first column indicates the number of amino acid groups.

Table 7. Clustering of amino acid alphabets for turns. The first column indicates the number of amino acid groups.

Table 8. Amino acid distances ignoring conformation.

[formula] Table 9. Conformation pair distances for each amino acid. Entries have been multiplied by a factor 200. (h: Helix, e: Sheet, c: coil, t: Turn.)