Nancy Cartwright and the measurement problem

Introduction

Classical physics is based on the notion of trajectory of a material object. A complete description of the latter is obtained when all coordinates and momenta of all its parts are simultaneously given. Non Linear Mechanics has added to the classical notion of a trajectory that of the chaotic character of certain solutions of the equations of motion, whereby sensitivity to initial conditions turns trajectories in deterministic but unpredictable ones.

At the basis of the necessity to abandon classical physics is the observation that atoms are stable. In classical physics, electrons orbiting around a nucleus would radiate electromagnetic waves continuously, and collapse on the nucleus: atoms would not be stable.

Another basic experimental observation is that a sufficiently focused electron beam with convenient energy, if hitting a cristal, leads to an interference pattern on a screen, much like that observed for the diffraction figure of electromagnetic waves. Thus, under certain conditions, the behaviour of material particles exhibits wave like features. This phenomenon is radically at variance with the classical notion that a corpuscular (discontinuous) entity cannot have a wave like (continuous) behaviour.

As emphasized in many Quantum Mechanics (hereafter QM) text books, and in particular in the first chapter of Quantum Mechanics by Landau and Lifchitz [\cite=landau], QM has thus to be based on motion concepts fundamentally different from those of classical mechanics: "In QM, the notion of a trajectory does not exist. This is expressed by the uncertainty principle, which Heisenberg discovered in 1927 ". This book first appeared in 1966, and it is a pity Ms Cartwright did not read it, it would have saved her from solving incorrectly some of the problems she discussed in her book [\cite=cartwright] (published in 1983) How the Laws of Physics Lie in particular in the last chapter entitled : How the Measurement Problem is an Artefact of Mathematics .

In this paper, I will examine the various thesis developed in that chapter of her book. I will argue that her position that "transition probabilities are fundamental" although correct in certain areas of physics, ignores a vast amount of facts which prove that what is fundamental in all cases is the quantum state; furthermore, I will argue that Cartwright does not identify correctly one of the last fundamental unsolved problems of QM nowadays: the duality of a world where quantum behaviour coexists with classical behaviour. A problem on which results obtained in the last few years [\cite=haroche] [\cite=wineland] have allowed perhaps decisive progress.

The measurement problem

The title of this chapter, i.e. How the measurement problem is an artefact of the mathematics, sets the stage. Refering to von Neumann's work of 1932 [\cite=neumann], there are two kinds of evolution in the quantum theory; one is governed by Schroedinger's equation, which is continuous and deterministic; the other is the reduction of the wave packet , which is discontinuous and indeterministic. Cartwright's goal along all this chapter is to deny this duality. The following is a quote of the introduction to the chapter:

In her attempt to justify this interpretation, the author stumbles however on a difficulty:

Eventually, she urges that

In the following, I will describe a different proposal, which was actually developed by the Bohr Copenhagen school. This proposal is based on the full recognition that QM is a bona fide example of a different logic, a logic which is at work in nature, and which is at variance with the traditional Aristotle prohibition of contradictions; a logic which led Bohr to adopt as motto:

Contraria sunt complementa

.

My view is that Nancy Cartwright's failed attempt at denying the duality at the core of QM is based in part on the failure to recognize the nature of this duality, and in part on the influence on her thinking of the dominant rejection of a logic which admits contradictions as a possibility within objects of nature.

In defence of the quantum state

In her section "In defence of reduction of the wave packet ", the author first describes in more details the difficulty with the measurement problem. This difficulty is met by all authors who believe that the Schroedinger equation is the only fundamental equation, governing all objects of the universe, which usually leads to ideas of parallel universes, and in the end, to the position that there is no possibility of knowing the world [\cite=espagnat]. Nancy Cartwright does not share this position, but her proposal to solve the problem is unacceptable, as I will argue in this paper.

In this section, she describes the current reasoning about the interaction of a quantum particle - such as an electron - with a "macroscopic" body. Quoting Cartwright:

...It is possible for macroscopic objects to be in states whith well defined values for all macroscopic observables... But interactions with microscopic objects brings them into superpositions. The electron starts out in a superposition with the apparatus in its ground state Together the composite of the two finishes after the measurements in a superposition, where the pointer of the apparatus has no well defined position but is distributed across the dial...After the measuremnt has ceased, a new kind of change occurs. The superposed state of the apparatus-plus-object reduces to one of the components of the superposition. This kind of change is called the "reduction of the wave packet", and the principle that governs it is the "projection postulate".

For clarity, let me quote in the following how Landau and Lifchitz describe this , with an added crucial statement (hereafter in bold letters):

Consider a system with two parts: a classical apparatus and an electron (a quantum object). The measurement process is defined by their interaction, the apparatus changes from its initial state to another state; this change allows to study the electron state. The states of the apparatus are characterized by certain physical values, "the apparatus pointer position", denoted by g, with eigenvalues gn. For simplicity the spectrum of the gn is supposed to be discrete. The states of the apparatus are noted Φn(ξ), where n corresponds to the apparatus "pointer position" gn, and ξ is the set of its coordinates; The classical character of the apparatus is expressed by the fact that we are certain that, at all time, it is in one of its known states Φ(n) with a certain determined value g. Let Φ0(ξ) the apparatus initial state wave function (before measurement) and Ψ(q) a certain electron initial wave function (q is the set of its coordinates). These functions describe independently the states of the apparatus and of the electron, and thus the initial wave function of the whole system (before interaction) is the product

[formula]

When the apparatus and the electron interact, QM allows in principle to follow the time variation of the whole system wave function. After the measurement process, expanding the latter in terms of the apparatus complete set of wave functions, we get a superposition of the form:

[formula]

the An(q) being certain functions of q . Thanks to the classical character of the apparatus the quantity g has a determined value ("the apparatus pointer position") at each time. Thus we can state that the apparatus+  electron system state will not be described by a sum such as equation ([\ref=superposition]), but by a single term which corresponds to the "apparatus pointer position" gn, i.e.

[formula]

The text then proceeds to demonstrating that the An(q) have to be of the form

[formula]

the φn are the normalized electron wave functions, after the measure, and an are the only constants which depend on the initial state Ψ(q) with

[formula]

where the Ψn(q) form a complete set of othonormal functions which depend on the measurement process.

The bold face sentences seem to me the fundamental issue which allows to understand the dual combination of the Schroedinger equation and of the projection postulate about the measurement process. Namely the postulate that there exist in the world objects which obey classical laws of motion, and others which obey QM. This postulate is coherent with the fact that classical mechanics is both a limiting case, and, at the same time, the foundation of Quantum Mechanics This issue is addressed later on in this work. I argue that the Copenhagen school has correctly suggested the solution, i.e. quantum versus classical, which, incidentally, is not synonymous with the opposition between microscopic and macroscopic, as emphasized by Landau and Lifchitz [\cite=landau]. Recent experiments [\cite=haroche] [\cite=wineland] have shed new light on this issue, and led to award the Nobel Prize to Serge Haroche and David Wineland.

In the remaining parts of the section 1 of the chapter, Cartwright attempts to show that Schroedinger equation cannot be the basic equation of the world, since interactions lead to vastly complicated entangled states. Her conclusion of this section is that reduction of the wave packet must occur quite generally. But she does not acknowledge that "measurement", and "reduction of the wave packet" may occur any time a quantum entity interacts with a classical one. She rather ascribes this to interaction with macroscopic objects. This is not a minor point. Macroscopicity is not the issue. There are macroscopic quantum objects, such as superconducting states, Quantum Hall states or neutron stars, etc.. The issue is quantum vs classical. In the Haroche group experiments, the classical object is reduced to a hundred atoms!

Are transition probabilities fundamental?

The section 2 of the chapter is entitled "Why transition probabilities are fundamental". It starts by an account of the two slit experiment: electrons are directed from a source to a photographic plate but there is a screen between the source and the plate. The screen is pierced by two conveniently spaced slits, noted 1 and 2. The amplitude to move from the source to a given point x on the screen is a1(x) if only slit 1 is open. It is a2(x) if only slit 2 is open. When both slits are open, the total amplitude is S(x) = a1(x)  +  a2(x). Both amplitudes are derived from the Schroedinger equation. the sum S is the standard QM result due to the linearity of the Schroedinger equation. The probability for an electron to hit the screen at x when both slits are open is |S|2  =  |a1(x)|2  +  |a2(x)|2  +  a1(x)*a2(x)  +  a1(x)a2(x)*. The last two terms are interference terms: when both slits are open, the result for |S|2 is not the sum for the processes when only one slit in turn is open. This example is a simplified version of the electron diffraction by a crystal: it accounts satisfactorily for the experimental results; it shows that consideration of probabilities only, inspired by the conventional classical logic, is an error. The possibility of interferences is a fact of life as far as quantum entities are concerned. Cartwright, on the other hand, is not satisfied, because her logic prohibits the possibility that a single particle traverses the screen simultaneously through both slits. It seems to me this reflects her difficulty with accepting that the notion of classical trajectory breaks down for quantum entities. She spends several pages reviewing various proposals by philosophers, who, like her, do not want to consider amplitudes or wave functions as a fundamental object of QM, and who grapple without success with the interference term which seems to reflect a "funny logic", at variance with the traditional one based on classical mechanics trajectories. In the course of this discussion she reveals a misconception about basic QM rules for addition of amplitudes. She writes:

...It supposes that the electron passes through neither one slit nor the other when we are not looking. When we do look, suddenly, there, it is either at the top slit or at the bottom. What is special about looking that causes objects to be places where they would not have been otherwise?

.

The answer to this ingenuous question is that "looking through which slit the electron passes" means detecting it through some interaction with some material means. For example, a photon scattered by the electron at one slit. In that case, as explained in the first pages of Feynman's Lecture Notes on QM [\cite=feynman], one cannot sum the amplitudes for passing through slit 1 and slit 2, because the final states at the screen are not identical: there is a scattered photon in one final state, and none in the other. In fact, whenever an inelastic process occurs along one path, the corresponding amplitude cannot be added to the others, and no interference effect results from this path. Summing over amplitudes for a given process requires the initial state and the final state for all paths to be identical. When writing a paper about the measurement problem, it would seem necessary to acknowledge this fact...

However, unhappy about all proposals to understand the double slit experiment and the "funny quantum logic" exhibited by the interference term, the author proposes

Let us admit that exponential decay, or particle scattering by a stationary target, or maybe a number of other phenomena can be dealt with by looking at transition probabilities. How could a scientific mind, or for that matter a rationaly oriented philosopher use a few examples as proof of such a universal statement: The only real probabilities in QM are transition probabilities ? Should not Hume's warnings [\cite=hume] about induction prevent us from such a dangerous reasoning? In the following I'll give counter examples which show that no generalization of the sort Cartwright advocates is allowed.

She adds furthermore:

I have been urging that the interpretation of quantum mechanics should be entirely in term of transition probabilities. When no transitions occur, ψ must remain uninterpreted or have only a subjunctive interpretation.

This is another incorrect stand, which I will show in a later section to be contrary to a number of examples. Another disputable position is quoted, in line with similar statements in the chapter : "Henry Margenau has long urged that all quantum measurements are ultimately measurements of position". The only canonical conjugates Cartwright ever considers in this chapter are momentum and position, which are related through the indetermination relation = i. What about the transverse components of the angular momentum, related by =  ilz? What about the relation between the guiding center coordinates Rx,Ry of the electron motion under magnetic field in two dimensions [\cite=lederer], which are related by =  il2B, where lB is the magnetic length? What about energy and time which are canonical conjugates? What about the canonical conjugation of phase φ and number N which is at the basis of phase coherence in superconductivity [\cite=BCS], etc..? Whenever two dynamic quantities are expressed as Q, and αd / dQ where α is a constant, such quantities are canonical conjugates...In other words, eliminating the "funny logic" of QM by eliminating position probabilities leaves unsolved the "funny logic" at work in all canonically conjugate quantities...

Is the measurement problem an artefact of mathematics?

The last section of the chapter is entitled : How the measurement problem is an artefact of the mathematics. It starts with the following statement;

.

Contrast this with the very first pages of reference [\cite=landau]:

Comparing the two quotations above, one concludes that both agree with the notion that reduction of the wave packet occurs all the time. However Nancy Cartwright does not consider the quantum-classical duality as a relevant notion, contrary to the Copenhagen school, as expressed by the quotation in section [\ref=defence].

The section then proceeds by examining various attempts, such as dealing with the system sizes, to solve the "characterization problem", only to find out they do not succeed. Eventually, the author states:

Sheer size cannot solve the characterization problem as I have laid out: it is a pseudo problem. The characterization problem is an artefact of mathematics. There is no real problem because there are not two different kinds of evolution in QM. There are evolutions that are correctly described by the Schroedinger equation, and there are evolutions that are correctly described by something like von Neumann's projection postulate. But these are not different kinds in any physically relevant sense. We think they are because of the way we write the theory.

In the remainder of this chapter, the author attempts to justify this position by invoking quantum field theory and by suggesting that using non unitary evolution operators in the former would eventually prove her point.

There is little doubt that quantum field theory is a useful tool to treat the physics of large numbers of identical particles such as fermions or bosons; statistical averages over large number of particles governed by the Schroedinger evolution operator do not depend on the reduction of single particle wave packets. However, quantum field theory is of little help in the physics of a small number of quantum particles. Nowadays, technological and fundamental science progress allows to measure single atoms irradiated with a few photons [\cite=wineland] or to explore states with a few photons using single atoms [\cite=haroche]. It may be that the program described by Nancy Cartwright succeeds, but its results do not solve either the "characterization problem" or its origin, the duality that she claims she has eliminated, because she has not clearly identified its essence.

The origin of duality: quantum world vs classical world

The Copenhagen group has clearly expressed - as shown by the quotation above from reference [\cite=landau] - the view that quantum mechanics cannot exist without the classical world. The introduction of this book [\cite=landau] states

Ordinarily, a more general theory can be formulated in a logically closed way, independently of a less general one. Relativity theory, for example, is built on fundamental principles without resorting to newtonian concepts. As for the formulation of the fundamental principles of quantum mechanics, it is basically impossible without the intervention of classical mechanics...It is clear that in a system built exclusively on quantum entities, there would be no possibility of formulating logically closed mechanics.

.

This statement deserves thorough consideration. Classical mechanics has been built over the years since Galilee. It embodies a large amount of theoretical and experimental successes, as well as infinitely many applications. Hamiltonians and Lagrangians, which originate from classical physics, are fundamental to develop any QM investigation. The theorist starts with the the expression of the classical Hamiltonian, or Lagrangian, of a system and proceeds by quantizing it, i. e. by introducing the conjugation relations between position and momentum, and/or between components of the angular momentum, etc..

However, do we understand to day fully under what condition an entity will behave classically, so that the superposition due to its interaction with a quantum one will end up in a single state, with the "pointer in a single position"? The usual answer is that when the action of a system is very large compared to [formula], it behaves classically [\cite=feynman2]. But this is not the whole story. We know various examples of macroscopic quantum states, such as the BCS ground state [\cite=BCS], the quantum Hall states [\cite=lederer] [\cite=laughlin], various superfluid states, Bose condensates, neutron stars, etc., so that macroscopicity cannot be the universal answer.

Recent experiments conducted in École Normale Supérieure in Paris [\cite=haroche] shed a bright light on the issues discussed by Nancy Cartwright, and do not support her view that "the laws of physics lie", or, for that matter, that the "measurement problem is an artefact of mathematics". In those experiments, a few photons are trapped in a cavity in a coherent superposition state with a spread in the number N of photons, and a fixed phase φ, following the canonical uncertainty relation between phase φ and number N, i.e. Δφ.ΔN  ≈  1. Conveniently prepared Rydberg atoms are then shot one by one through the cavity where they interact with the electromagnetic field, which alters their energy levels depending on the number of photons which have interacted with the atom inside the cavity. This perturbation is analysed when the atoms emerge from the cavity, so that the number of photons in the cavity is determined. What is found is that this number first fluctuates with the first atoms; the distribution of states according to the number of photons is found to obey a Poisson distribution of probabilities; then the number of photons fluctuates less and less as more atoms are shot through the cavity, until, after about 100 atoms, a single number is found to be stabilized. In other words, the quantum state of photons inside the cavity is projected by its repeated interaction with the atoms in a pure state with a fixed number of photons, while its phase becomes undetermined. The interpretation of this experiment is that the "classical entity" which projects the superposition of states into a pure state is the set of about 100 atoms which have been shot through the cavity. On top of this, the experiment allows to follow how this "classicism" gradually appears as the number of atoms increases. Once a pure state is created, any later measurement finds it remains unchanged, as QM text books teach. Experiments on entangled states made of two level atoms and superposed photon states allow to give flesh to a "photon-made" Schroedinger cat, etc..

Such results on single quantum entities built out of a few units of quantum particles vindicate the "funny quantum logic" which Nancy Cartwright urges to forget in favour of the Boolean familiar classical logic of transition probabilities. They illustrate very clearly the Bohr "complementarity" which led him to adopt as motto the remarkable expression quoted above: "Contraria sunt complementa". This expression is a striking statement about a contradictory unit, that of wave and particle i.e that of continuity and discontinuity. In the latter, both terms coexist, and either term of the contradiction dominates depending on the experimental conditions. In fact, in my view, the main reason why Nancy Cartwright is proved wrong so convincingly by experiments is her philosophical blindness to the "funny logic" which admits inner contradictions within entities as a quite general mode of existence of reality. The quotation in bold letters in section [\ref=measure] exhibits her solid faith in "standard logic", as a decisive cause for her "defence of transition probabilities". Standard logic is the Aristotelian logic which prohibits contradiction within the thing. "A cannot be non A". Even though this logic applies in infinitely many cases and often allows to "think clearly", it fails to take into account a host of real life situations, such as QM, just as euclidean geometry describes most geometrical issues in our non relativistic world, but fails to account for the space time curvature in the universe. In this specific set of recent experiments with a small number of quantum interacting entities, the Copenhagen group interpretation of QM is spectacularly confirmed as is the duality of classical and quantum behaviour in nature. There remains to understand more fundamentally under what general conditions an object will behave as a quantum one, or as a classical one. The experiments described above ([\cite=haroche]) are a giant step in this direction.

The point of view following which the only equation governing the world is the Schroedinger equation (see for example reference [\cite=espagnat] [\cite=everett]) is somewhat different from Nancy Cartwright's. In this "Schroedinger only" point of view, infinitely many worlds coexist and develop in infinitely many superposition states. This position also denies the duality discussed above. It disregards the impossibility of funding QM without classical mechanics. It results in the impossibility of establishing any truth about the world we live in. Such theories and philosophies will have a hard time arguing away the results described above. The existence of objects obeying classical mechanics is a theoretical and experimental achievement of mankind which should not be dismissed because of the existence of objects obeying QM.

Another debatable issue is Nancy Cartwright's stand that when there are no transition probabilities, the wave function cannot be given any interpretation. To begin with, the existence of quantum states is dictated by the breakdown of the classical notion of trajectory at the microscopic level. The quantum state, which contains necessarily less information than the simultaneous existence of position q and momentum p in classical mechanics, replaces those two entities as the best possible theoretical entity when the former do not exist simultaneously. No transition probability can be inferred without the notion of quantum state. But is the quantum state, and its space description, the wave function, only a "theoretical entity"? I urge to consider the wave function as a bona fide real entity. Consider the structure of molecules, which can now be observed in detail one by one by various techniques. Not only are their shape and spatial structure dictated by the shape of the atomic wave functions, but knowledge of the latter allows to build taylor made atomic complexes with the desired shape or chemical activity. Hacking [\cite=hacking] urges to consider practice as a decisive test of reality for theoretical entities. If he is right - as I believe he is - atomic wave functions have to be considered as facts of life, which are used practically to create specific molecules.

Macroscopic quantum objects, such as a piece of superconducting metal, are endowed with a macroscopic coherent ground state wave function which has a fluctuating total number of particles and a fixed phase. The latter leads to such devices as SQUIDS [\cite=tinkham] which are spectacularly accurate, among other things, in measuring very small magnetic field intensities, in accounting for the Meissner effect, or the occurrence of quantized filaments of flux (vortices) in a superconductor submitted to a magnetic field, etc.. All such effects empirically well known and theoretically well understood do not depend on transition rates, but on the structure of the macroscopic wave function. The basic explanation of the Quantum Hall Effects is based on the wave function derived by Laughlin [\cite=laughlin]. The latter, in the case of the fractional version of the Hall effects, leads to the prediction (and subsequent observation) of fractionally charged particles in the fractional quantum Hall state, by straightforward examination of the wave function phase. Another example is the vanishing longitudinal resistivity which coincides with the quantum Hall transverse resistivity plateaux: it is due to the absence of any scattering process (i.e. any transition) for the electron in a chiral surface state...Those examples are sufficient to establish that Nancy Cartwright's position on the lack of meaning of the wave function when no transition rates are available is not supported by a number of successful explanatory theories with practical applications.

Conclusion

In addition to questioning critically Nancy Cartwright's position on the measurement problem, on the wave function, and on the fundamental role she advocates for transition rates, the results mentioned above suggest rather convincingly that "laws of physics" (for example the Schroedinger equation) do tell truths about the world... Are such truths absolute ones? Given definite experimental conditions and technological stage of development, the answer cannot be but positive. For example the appearance of superconductivity below such and such temperature at ordinary pressure in such and such materials, or the appearance of quantum Hall effects, etc., not to speak of QM itself. So those absolute truths are also relative ones. Technological improvements, better accuracy of measurements, different experimental parameters, might and most probably will enrich them by discoveries of new phenomena, of new behaviours of matter, so that our representation of the world will evolve, without falsifying the absolute/relative truths mentioned above. On the other hand, some truths have so to speak a higher degree of truth, inasmuch as they are true whatever happens in the future: think of Noether's theorem, for example: the invariance of a system under a symmetry ensures the conservation of a corresponding entity in this system.

I have argued that Nancy Cartwright does not identify correctly the dual nature of quantum evolutions (Schroedinger equation and reduction of the wave packet). She tries to argue it away by invoking an artefact of mathematics. This dual nature has its origin in the duality of our world where quantum objects and classical ones coexist and interact. The recent experiments I have described confirm the Bohr Copenhagen interpretation of QM. There remains to establish more generally under what conditions an object behaves classically or according to quantum mechanics.

Acknowledgements. I wish to acknowledge useful and friendly exchange of e-mails with Franck Laloë about the topics of this paper.