The Importance of Computation in Astronomy Education M. Zingale, F.X. Timmes, R. Fisher, B.W. O'Shea

Computational Needs in Astronomy & Astrophysics

Computational skills are required at all levels of education and research in astronomy. Theoretical astrophysics is dominated by simulation instruments, often written in compiled and interpreted languages. Observational astronomy is entirely digital, with software pipelines for reducing and analyzing data. Community tools, such as the Python-based AstroPy, are actively developed for these pipelines. The workflow in astronomy is often expressed in UNIX-like environments such as OS X or Linux. Students in secondary or undergraduate programs may be unfamiliar with (and put off from) the command line and the job skills that it enables.

Undergraduate Education

Many astronomy and astrophysics programs encourage their majors to take some computer programming classes. For example, the State University of New York transfer path for physics requires an Introduction to Computer Science in the first 2 years. However, this is where the encouragement of developing essential, transferrable job skills in computation frequently ends.

Astronomy students should be versed in elements of scientific computing and basic numerical analysis in astronomy courses that leverage community developed infrastructure. For example, Open Source web-based tools can be used to explore all stages of stellar evolution. Open data archives enable access to galactic and extragalactic data. These, and other, communuty developments offer educators outstanding opportunities to bring students directly into contact with real-world data, and to integrate data analysis and computation into the curriculum. Some examples of data-driven educational exercises include:

We applaud the AAS's advocacy for increased literacy in scientific computation, as exemplified by the Hack Day events at recent AAS meetings. We suggest the AAS enhance its encouragement of sharing computational tools, educational lessons, and projects amongst their members.

Graduate Education

A popular way to train graduate students in specialized codes and techniques used in each astronomy discipline are summer schools and workshops. We encourage the AAS to:

Open Source and Open Education Resources

Open Education Resources (OER) are freely accessible, openly licensed documents and media for teaching, learning, assessing, and research. OER are among the leading trends in education, yet there is a paucity of quality material for astronomy. A few notable exceptions include: (1) astroEDU, which launched in February 2015, targets K-12 and is supported by the IAU Office for Astronomy Development; (2) the Astrobetter Wiki, which include links to user-contributed class slides, animations, texts, and other resources; (3) open-licensed texts such as the Open Astrophysics Bookshelf and others; (4) MESA-Web, a web-based portal for stellar evolution aimed at secondary and undergraduate education; and (5) IPython/Jupyter notebooks for deployment of interactive computation-based exercises.

Careers

Computational skills and critical thinking are among the most transferable job skills that an astronomy education can provide. We encourage the continued advocacy by the AAS for increased computational literacy, exemplified by the Hack Day events at recent AAS meetings, to provide skills that employers consistently seek.