.5pt 10pt 0pt 9.3in

Quantum mechanical constraints on the measurement of the density of the electromagnetic energy

D.L. Khokhlov

Sumy State University, R.-Korsakov St. 2, Sumy 40007, Ukraine E-mail: khokhlov@cafe.sumy.ua

The energy density of the electromagnetic wave is given by

[formula]

where E is the energy of the electromagnetic wave, V is the volume, S is the cross-section, t is the time. Let the source of the electromagnetic wave move with the velocity v relative to the laboratory frame. Let an observer in the laboratory frame measure the energy density of the electromagnetic wave. According to the special relativity [\cite=Lan], the energy of the electromagnetic wave and the volume (the time) follow the Lorentz transformation. Then the energy of the electromagnetic wave and the volume (the time) measured in the laboratory frame are shifted with respect to those in the frame of the source. When measuring the energy density of the electromagnetic wave emitted by the moving source, we obtain the double relativistic effect

[formula]

Electromagnetic wave is a quantum object. Then we should take into account quantum mechanical constraints on the measurement of the density of the electromagnetic energy. Due to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle we cannot simultaneously measure the momentum and the space coordinate (the energy and the time) of the electromagnetic wave. When determining the energy of the electromagnetic wave emitted in the moving frame, we cannot determine the volume (the time) in the moving frame and should use the volume (the time) determined in the laboratory frame. Then, the energy of the electromagnetic wave is shifted in accordance with the Lorentz transformation, but the volume (the time) is taken as a laboratory one. As a result we obtain the ordinary relativistic effect for the density of the electromagnetic energy

[formula]

Thus, due to quantum mechanical constraints, the conventional formula of the relativistic effect for the density of the electromagnetic energy given by eq. ([\ref=eq:W2]) is not correct. Instead of this we should use the formula given by eq. ([\ref=eq:W3]).

Consider electromagnetic wave as a bunch of photons with the frequency ω. The luminosity of the bunch of photons is given by

[formula]

where n is the number of photons, [formula] is the Planck constant. The luminosity of the bunch of photons emitted by the moving source suffers the ordinary relativistic shift given by eq. ([\ref=eq:W3]). In the bunch of photons, the frequency and the number of photons are bound with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Hence we cannot simultaneously determine the frequency of photons and the number of photons. Hence relativistic effects for the frequency of photons and for the number of photons can be measured in the different incompatible experiments. When measuring the frequency of photons emitted by the moving source, the number of photons is taken as a laboratory one, and the frequency of photons suffers the Doppler shift, [formula]. When measuring the luminosity of the bunch of photons, the frequency of photons is taken as a laboratory one, and the number of photons is shifted as [formula]. Under the conventional approach, when measuring the luminosity of the bunch of photons in the moving frame, we determine both the Doppler shift of the photon's frequency and the shift of the number of photons. However this contradicts to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.

Thus the quantum mechanics, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, imposes constraints on the measurement of the density of the electromagnetic energy. First, it reduces from double to ordinary the relativistic effect for the density of the electromagnetic energy. Second, relativistic effects for the frequency of photons and for the number of photons are incompatible.