A built-in scale in the initial spectrum of density perturbations: evidence from cluster and CMB data

F. Atrio-Barandela Física Teórica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Salamanca, 37008 Spain e-mail: atrio@astro.usal.es

J. Einasto Tartu Observatory, EE-2444 Tõravere, Estonia e-mail: einasto@max.aai.ee

S. Gottlöber, V. Müller Astrophysikalisches Institut Potsdam, An der Sternwarte 16, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany e-mail: (sgottloeber,vmueller)@aip.de

A. Starobinsky Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, Moscow 117334, Russia e-mail: alstar@landau.ac.ru

One of the crucial problems in cosmology is to determine the shape and amplitude of the initial (primordial) power spectrum of density perturbations. In the standard Friedman-Robertson-Walker cosmology this spectrum is arbitrary. It is specified as an initial condition at the cosmological singularity (the Big Bang). The only restriction is on the type of perturbations: they should belong to those modes which do not destroy the homogeneity of the Universe at early times, in particular, they should represent the growing mode in the case of adiabatic perturbations. For the scales of interest, the opposite assumption would result in the Universe being strongly anisotropic and inhomogeneous at the time of the Big Bang nucleosynthesis (BBN) that would completely spoil its predictions for the primordial abundance of light elements. On the other hand, the simplest inflation models of the early Universe predict the power spectrum of the growing mode of adiabatic perturbations at present to be approximately scale invariant, i.e. Harrison-Zeldovich, characterised by a slope n  ≈  1 on large scales [\cite=guth]. In addition to processes during the inflation era the current power spectrum is determined by physical processes occurring during the radiation dominated regime that freeze out and damp the growth of density perturbations within the cosmological horizon. The final spectrum depends on the values of cosmological parameters and on the exact nature of the dark matter present in the Universe.

>From the observational point of view, the current (evolved) power spectrum of matter density perturbations can be estimated by measuring clustering properties of galaxies and clusters of galaxies. Using the distribution of rich Abell clusters, the spectrum has been recently determined on scales from k  ≈  0.03 up to k  ≈  0.3 ~ h Mpc- 1 [\cite=einasto] (h is the Hubble constant in units of 100 ~ km s- 1Mpc- 1). The observed power spectrum contains a sharp peak at k  ≈  0.05 ~ h Mpc- 1. A similar feature on the same scale has been observed in the 1-dimensional deep galaxy redshift survey in the direction of Galactic poles, in the 2-dimensional power spectrum obtained from the Las Campanas Redshift Survey of galaxies, and from the deprojected power spectrum of the angular APM galaxy survey [\cite=landy].

The purpose of this letter is to confront the power spectrum of matter density perturbations obtained from cluster data with measurements of CMB temperature anisotropies on different angular scales. We shall concentrate on the following questions: Are CMB data in agreement with the peaked matter power spectrum? If so, can we find possible restrictions on the primordial initial spectrum using combined CMB and optical data? In particular, can CMB and optical data be explained by a specific choice of cosmological parameters within the framework of the standard cosmological model with scale free initial power spectrum, or some change in this model is required?

In this letter, we do not intend to do full analysis of all available data at intermediate and small angular scales on CMB. We shall use the observations made at Saskatoon [\cite=saskatoon]. By using a synthetic antenna beam, the Saskatoon group was able to measure temperature anisotropies with five different angular resolutions corresponding to multipoles between l  ≈  80 and l  ≈  400. This range makes the experiment especially well suited for comparison with the cluster power spectrum [\cite=einasto] since it roughly corresponds to the wavelengths probed by the cluster data. We used the 4-year COBE data [\cite=bennet] to get the absolute normalisation and the shape of the matter power spectrum at scales close to the present cosmological horizon.

We calculate CMB temperature anisotropies for three different initial power spectra: (a) a scale free initial spectrum with a power index n, (b) a double power law approximation to the cluster spectrum, and (c) a spectrum based on the observed cluster spectrum. Outside the measured range, the latter was extrapolated assuming a scale free spectrum. At large wavenumbers (k  ≥  0.05 h Mpc- 1) the shape of the observed cluster spectrum is similar to that of galaxies [\cite=costa]. For the power spectrum (b), we used a slope n =  - 1.8 for small scales which is a smooth extrapolation of the cluster data. However, since this region of the power spectrum has little influence on multipoles above l = 400, this assumption will not affect our conclusions. At large scales the spectrum is poorly determined. Within observational errors, it is compatible with being Harrison-Zeldovich. Furthermore, COBE/DMR data indicates [\cite=bennet] that the power spectrum of matter density perturbations has n  ≈  1 for k  ≈  0.003 ~ h Mpc- 1; more exactly, n = 1.1  ±  0.2. Accordingly, we varied the slope at large scales in that range.

The initial power spectrum is determined as follows:

[formula]

where P(k) is the power spectrum of matter perturbations at the current epoch, and T(k) is the transfer function for a particular CDM model. The transfer function depends only on physical processes taking place within the horizon. In the previous expression we assumed that the observed cluster power spectrum Pcl(k) was proportional to P(k) over the range probed by the cluster data: Pcl(k) = b2clP(k), where bcl is the bias factor for clusters of galaxies.

In summary, for a set of cosmological parameters, we first calculate the matter transfer function, and matter and radiation power spectra for the scale invariant model (a); next, we determine the initial power spectrum P0(k) for (b) and (c) as given by eq. ([\ref=init]); finally, we calculate the angular CMB and matter power spectra of models (b) and (c). We assume the Universe has a flat geometry. We did not consider mixed dark matter (MDM) models here. They differ from CDM models mainly on small wavelengths which have little influence on our results. Furthermore, MDM models with one stable neutrino and h  ≥  0.5 have problems to create small scale structure. In these models galaxy formation occurs too late [\cite=fang], and considering scale-free MDM models with n > 1 does not help [\cite=pog]. In what follows we shall consider Ωb  +  Ωc  +  ΩΛ = 1, with Ωb, Ωc, and ΩΛ being the fraction of the energy density in baryons, cold dark matter and vacuum energy (cosmological constant), respectively.

To calculate the radiation power spectrum we used the packages COSMICS and CMBFAST [\cite=cmbfast]. The radiation power spectrum was normalised to the COBE/DMR four year data [\cite=bennet] using the angular wavenumber C10 as central value instead of the quadrupole [\cite=white-bunn]. The comparison to the cluster power spectrum gives bcl  ≈  3 for n  ≈  1. We have performed the integration for the three primordial spectra and parameters: [formula]; Hubble constant from h = 0.3 to 0.8; baryon density from Ωbh2 = 0.005 to 0.033 centred on the range suggested by BBN [\cite=bbn]. We also considered models with cosmological constant. In these models we chose a Hubble constant that makes the Universe 14 Gyr old. It ranged from h = 0.5 for ΩΛ  =  0.1 to h = 0.7 for ΩΛ  =  0.7, in agreement with the recalibration of the Hubble constant and cosmic ages made by [\cite=feast] using the new determination of distances to subdwarfs and Cepheids based on Hipparcos. The amplitude of a temperature anisotropy expected on a given angular scale was found using the window function that best models the synthetic beam pattern of the Saskatoon experiment for that scale [\cite=saskatoon]. Finally, for each model we calculated the χ2-deviation between the theoretical prediction and the Saskatoon data. In Figure 1 we plot the intervals in the parameter space at 68% and 95% confidence level. The dashed lines indicate the range 0.007  ≤  Ωbh2  ≤  0.024 favoured by BBN [\cite=bbn].

Results of the χ2 test for comparison of different models and cosmological parameters are shown in Figure 1. This figure shows that CMB data alone exclude a large range of parameter space for each of our three basic models. Standard CDM model is compatible with CMB data for values of the Hubble constant and baryon fraction that are almost out of the range of astronomical interest. An increase of the power index n helps, but such models are not viable because they overproduce mass fluctuations on scales of 8h- 1 Mpc (σ8). Actually, it is well known that even the scale-invariant CDM model normalised to the COBE data is excluded for that reason. The best scale free model has a fairly large cosmological constant, ΩΛ  ≈  0.6. A CDM model with large cosmological constant and high baryon fraction was suggested in [\cite=szalay] to explain the presence of the large walls and voids in the distribution of galaxies. Since the baryon and dark matter fractions are comparable, the amplitude of acoustic oscillations near the recombination epoch are fairly large. Below, we shall discuss this model in more detail. On the other hand, the cluster based and double power law spectra both fit the results of the Saskatoon experiment rather well in the range of parameters of astronomical interest. The best agreement with the CMB data is obtained for a low or vanishing cosmological constant, and for a spectral index n = 1. The allowed range of the Hubble constant is rather large for a reasonable baryon fraction.

In Figure 2 we compare matter power spectra and temperature anisotropy spectra for our three basic models with the data. The cosmological parameters were chosen to reproduce the CMB data within the 68% confidence level. As expected, the temperature anisotropy spectra are very similar. In other words, the present CMB data alone is not sufficient to discriminate between models. By contrast, the matter power spectra are very different. The scale free model with large cosmological constant has a broad maximum at large wavenumber (k  ≈  0.01 ~ h ~ Mpc -  1); the maximum of the first acoustic oscillation occurs at k  ≈  0.1 ~ h ~ Mpc -  1, and is of rather small relative amplitude. Both wavenumbers are outside from the range where the peak in the spectrum is observed: k0 = 0.052  ±  0.005 ~ h ~ Mpc -  1 [\cite=einasto]. Therefore we conclude that, contrary to the expectation of [\cite=szalay], this peak is not related to acoustic oscillations in the baryon-photon plasma. The scale free model spectrum agrees with the observed cluster (and galaxy) spectrum on short wavelengths up to the peak. However, no combination of cosmological parameters reproduces the peak at k = k0. The existence of a broad maximum is an intrinsic property of all scale free models and such maximum cannot produce a quasi-regular supercluster-void network as shown in [\cite=einasto2]. On the other hand, the cluster and double power law spectra fit the observed cluster spectrum by construction and reproduce the CMB data, i.e they fit equally well both datasets. Therefore, the present combined cluster and CMB data favour models with a built-in scale in the initial spectrum.

Figure 2 shows also that differences between our three basic models are on long wavelenghts for the matter power spectrum, and on small angular scales for the CMB spectrum. Future measurements, both optical and CMB, should concentrate to these scales.

Initial post-inflation power spectra are plotted in Figure 3. We see that the cluster data based model has a peak at k = 0.05 ~ h Mpc- 1, followed by a break in amplitude. The break in the initial spectrum of the double power law model is similar to the previous one, but the relative amplitude of the peak is larger. Using both optical and CMB data we could determine three parameters of the broken scale invariant initial power spectrum: the position and the amplitude of the break, and the amplitude of the peak above the initial scale free spectrum with n = 1.

Double inflation models provide a possible scenario where the formation of a peak could have taken place [\cite=kofman]. The presence of two scalar fields driving the evolution of the Universe has a built-in scale defined by the moment when the inflaton field that initially drove inflation becomes subdominant. Another possibility which does not require a fine tuning of the initial energy density of different scalar fields is when the inflaton field evolves through a kink in the potential. A quick change in the first derivative in the inflaton potential generates a sharp peak in the matter power spectrum followed by a break in amplitude [\cite=starobinski]. Note that this effect is beyond the slow-roll approximation to the motion of the inflaton field or any adiabatic correction to it. Obviously, the location of this scale is a free parameter which can be determined from observational data. The initial power spectrum found in [\cite=starobinski] and calibrated according the observed power spectrum is shown in Figure 3. It is very similar to the empirical initial power spectrum plotted in the left panel of Figure 3; the relative heights of the peak and the break are also close to the observed values.

The main conclusion we can draw from our study is that, within the accuracy of present measurements, the combined cluster and CMB temperature anisotropy data suggest the existence of a break in the initial power spectrum of matter density perturbations. The sharp peak found earlier in the cluster power spectrum [\cite=einasto] accounts for the observed high amplitude of the first Doppler peak in the CMB spectrum, if the baryon fraction is not too high (Ωbh2  <  0.024 for h≃0.6). On the other hand, if the cosmological constant is large (ΩΛ  >  0.4), then it would be difficult to reconcile a built-in scale in the initial matter power spectrum with the present CMB data. Only new and more accurate observations of the power spectrum, both optical and CMB, can discriminate between these two alternatives. In any case, the study of non-scale invariant initial spectra are of crucial importance since they could provide a direct test of more complicated models of inflation, violating the slow-roll approximation or having more than one inflaton field.

Acknowledgements. We thank Ed Bertschinger, Uros Seljak and Matias Zaldarriaga for the permission to use their software packages COSMICS and CMBFAST to calculate the angular power spectrum of the microwave background radiation, and Alex Szalay for stimulating discussion. This study was supported by grants of the German Science Foundation, Estonian Science Foundation, Astrophysical Institute Potsdam, and by Spanish German Integrated Actions HA 1995 - 0079. F.A.B. would like to acknowledge the support of the Junta de Castilla y León, grant SA40/97. A.S. acknowledges the support of the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, grant 96-02-17591. S.G. acknowledges support from the Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina with means of the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung grant LPD 1996.