Introduction

Given the importance of hydrodynamic dynamos in accounting for solar and stellar variabilities, a large number of studies have been made of their dynamical modes of behaviour using a range of dynamo models. However, the complexity and the numerical costs of employing the full magneto-hydrodynamical partial differential equations (Gilman 1983) have resulted in a great deal of effort going into the study of simpler related systems, including mean field and truncated models.

Both the mean field models (cf. Krause and Rädler 1980; Brandenburg et al. 1989; Brandenburg, Moss and Tuominen 1989; Tavakol et al. 1995) and truncated systems (Zeldovich, Ruzmaikin and Sokoloff 1983; Weiss, Cattaneo and Jones 1984; Feudel, Jansen and Kurths 1993) have been shown to be capable of producing a spectrum of dynamical modes of behaviour, including equilibrium, periodic and chaotic states.

Here we shall concentrate on truncated models and recall that there have been two approaches in the study of such models: the quantitative study of the truncated equations resulting from concrete partial differential equations (e.g. Schmalz and Stix 1991) and the qualitative approach involving the use of normal form theory to construct robust minimal low order systems which capture important aspects of the dynamo dynamics (Tobias, Weiss and Kirk 1995).

Given the approximate nature of the truncated models, an important question arises as to the extent to which the results produced by such models are an artefact of their details. This is potentially of importance since, on the basis of results from dynamical systems theory, structurally stable systems are not everywhere dense in the space of dynamical systems (Smale 1966), and therefore small changes in the models can potentially produce qualitatively important changes in their dynamics (Tavakol and Ellis 1988; Coley and Tavakol 1992; Tavakol et al. 1995).

To partially answer this question, we take a somewhat complementary approach to the previous works, by looking at the robustness of the truncated models studied by Schmalz and Stix with respect to a number of reasonable changes to their components. This work extends and reviews our previous work (Covas et al. 1996).

Mean field dynamo models with a dynamic α

As an example of how the details of truncated models can change their behaviour, we take the truncated dynamic α models considered in Schmalz and Stix. The starting point of this work is the mean field induction equation

[formula]

in the usual notation with the turbulent magnetic diffusitivity ηt and the coefficient α arising from the correlation of small scale (turbulent) velocity and magnetic fields (Krause and Rädler 1980).

For the sake of comparison we take an axisymmetrical configuration with one spatial dimension x corresponding to a latitude coordinate (and measured in terms of the stellar radius R), together with a longitudinal velocity with a constant radial gradient (the vertical shear ω0). The magnetic field is given by

[formula]

where Aφ is the φ-component (latitudinal) of the magnetic vector potential and Bφ the φ-component of [formula]. These assumptions allow equation ([\ref=induction]) to be split into

[formula]

Furthermore α is divided into a static (kinematic) and a dynamic (magnetic) part as follows: α  =  α0 cos x - αM(t), with its time-dependent part αM(t) satisfying an evolution equation of the form

[formula]

where O(αM) is the damping term and [formula] the driving term, which is a pseudo-scalar and quadratic in the magnetic field (see Covas et al. (1996) for details of this and the truncations of equations ([\ref=p1]), ([\ref=p2]) and ([\ref=dynamicalpha])). We consider the interval 0  ≤  x  ≤  π (which corresponds to the full range of latitudes) and take A = B = C = 0 at x = 0 and x = π as boundary conditions. We restrict the allowed modes to the antisymmetric subset, that is, those modes that satisfy the condition [formula] at x = π / 2.

Schmalz and Stix then fix the functional form of F and study the resulting modal truncations. Now given the fact that the exact form of [formula] is not known precisely, we shall examine in the next section how robust their results are with respect to changes in [formula].

Robustness with respect to changes in the driving term

In their studies, Schmalz and Stix take the following form for the feedback term

[formula]

and look at the various N - modal truncations of these equations to find out what happens to the dynamical behaviour of the resulting systems as N is increased. In all of the following discussion, we assume pure antisymmetric modes.

To determine the nature of the dynamics, we shall employ the spectrum of Lyapunov exponents, and distinguish signatures of the types [formula], [formula], and [formula] as corresponding to equilibrium, periodic, and chaotic regimes respectively.

For the sake of comparison we summarise, schematically, the results of the integration of the systems of Schmalz and Stix (see also Covas et al. 1996), in Figure 1. Here the largest Lyapunov exponent is depicted by a solid line and its negative, zero and positive values indicate equilibrium, periodic and chaotic regimes respectively (the second Lyapunov exponent is plotted as a dashed line).

Since in many astrophysical settings (including that of the Sun) the sign of the dynamo number, D, is not known, we also study the effects of changing its sign. The results for negative dynamo numbers are given in Figure 2.

An interesting mode of behaviour occurs in the spiky regions of Figure 2 which corresponds to the presence of "multiple attractors" (of more than one attractor consisting of equilibrium and periodic states) over substantial intervals of D.

To clarify the consequences of this behaviour, we have plotted in Figure 3 the behaviour of the N = 4 truncation as a function of small changes in the dynamo number and the initial conditions. It clearly demonstrates that in these regimes small changes in either D or the initial conditions may produce drastic changes in the dynamical behaviour of the system. This form of fragility could be of significance in producing seemingly intermittent types of behaviour.

To study the robustness of this system we considered a modified feedback term in the form

[formula]

where f1 = (μ0ρ)- 1 and f2 = (μ0ρβ)- 1 (β is the combined (turbulent plus ohmic) diffusion of the field, ρ the density of the medium and μ0 the magnetic constant). The additional second term on the right hand side of ([\ref=abalphab2]) is reminiscent of the type appearing in a more physically motivated form of F given by Kleeorin and Ruzmaikin (1982), Zeldovich, Ruzmaikin and Sokoloff (1983) and Kleeorin, Rogachevskii and Ruzmaikin (1995) and discussed in Covas et al. (1996).

Figure 4 summarises the results for this modified form of F and as can be seen, the inclusion of [formula] in equation ([\ref=abalphab2]) has drastic effects on the dynamics of the system, for both positive and negative dynamo numbers. In particular, it strongly suppresses the chaotic behaviour found by Schmalz and Stix.

Comparison with other functional forms

In Covas et al. (1996), we considered the effects of using more physically motivated choices for the driving term given by Kleeorin and Ruzmaikin (1982), Zeldovich, Ruzmaikin and Sokoloff (1983) and Kleeorin, Rogachevskii and Ruzmaikin (1995) in the form

[formula]

where g1 =  - (μ0ρ)- 1 and g2 = (μ0ρβ)- 1 are physical constants.

The results of considering the cases with g1  ≠  0, g2 = 0 and g1  ≠  0, g2  ≠  0 can be summarised as follows. In the former case, the behaviour seems to mirror that seen for the case with [formula], in the sense that for D > 0 there is an asymptotic dominance of "multiple attractor" regimes, while for D < 0 this behaviour is replaced by chaotic behaviour. In the latter case, however, where the term proportional to [formula] is included, there is a suppression of both chaotic and "multiple attractor" regimes, and the behaviour looks similar to that depicted in Figure 4. We also changed the damping operator so that it was of the form derived by Kleeorin, Rogachevskii and Ruzmaikin (1995). It was found, however, that this change did not produce any qualitative changes.

Conclusions

We have studied the robustness of truncated αΩ dynamos including a dynamic α equation, with respect to a change in the driving term of the [formula] type. We find that this changes the results of Schmalz and Stix drastically by suppressing the possibility of chaotic behaviour. Our results presented here and those in Covas et al. (1996) show that changes in the driving term have important effects on the dynamical behaviour of the resulting systems. Furthermore, the sign of the dynamo number also plays an important role, being capable of radically changing the behaviour of the system. Typically we find that the behaviour of the system for [formula] and D > 0 is similar to the one with [formula], but with D < 0 and vice-versa. The change of sign causes the behaviour to change from typically chaotic to "multiple attractor" solutions. These correspond to regimes where equilibrium and periodic regimes are present simultaneously. As a result, small changes in D or the initial conditions can substantially change the behaviour of the system. This type of behaviour can be of importance in producing intermittent type behaviour observed in solar variability.