Connecting Galaxy Disk and Extended Halo Gas Kinematics

Observations & Simulations of Extended Halo Gas

We have extracted rotation curves from ESI spectra of 10 absorption selected galaxies. The galaxies have a range of inclination and position angles with respect to the quasar line of sight and a range of impact parameters between 26-107 kpc. Figure 1 shows an example case of the quasar field Q0454-220 where zgal  =  0.48382 and D = 107 kpc. The extended absorbing gas aligns with one side of the galaxy rotation curve. Interestingly, the clouds are blended together, which is suggestive that the gas exhibits some form of organized motion (e.g., Figure 1b). In fact, in all but one case, we find the absorbing gas aligns with one side of the rotation curves. However, with this diverse sample, disk-like halo rotation models cannot reproduce the observed halo gas velocity spread. Thus, disk-like halo rotation does not seem to dominate over infall and outflow kinematic contributions as was previously suggested [\citep=s02].

Such discrepancies with the simple models have motivated us to investigate the connection between disk/halo/IGM gas in cosmological simulations of galaxy formation. The simulations are performed using the Eulerian Gas dynamics plus N-body Adaptive Refinement Tree (ART) code [\citep=k2]. We ran mock quasar sightlines through the simulations sampling every 10 kpc in a 80 kpc grid around the galaxies. Approximately 30% of the sightlines, primarily those probing along the major axes, are consistent with disk-like rotation. Although it naively appears that the absorption kinematics are consistent with disk rotation, inspection of the simulations reveals that the gas does not necessarily co-rotate with the galaxies. In 70% of sightlines, simple models of disk rotation fail to reproduce the absorption velocities and velocity spreads. Thus, we find that, statistically, the kinematics of halo gas in cosmological simulations are not inconsistent with observed halo gas kinematics. Simulations suggest that stellar winds, SNe, minor mergers/harassments, and cool filament gas inflows all contribute to the dynamics of the halo gas. The dynamic contribution of all of these mechanisms are dependent on the galactocentric distance as well as the evolutionary state (quiescent or star forming) of the host galaxy.