G. Michałek1, N. Gopalswamy2, S. Yashiro2,

Introduction

Space Weather is significantly controlled by coronal mass ejections (CMEs) which can affect the Earth in a different way. CMEs originating close to the central meridian, directed toward the Earth, excite the biggest scientific concern. In coronagraphic observations they appear as enhancement surrounding the entire occulting disk and they were called 'halo CME'. Since the first identification by Howard et al. (1982) plenty of them were detected and now they are routinely recorded by the high sensitive SOHO/LASCO coronagraphs. In spite of large advantage over previous instruments, the SOHO/LASCO observations are still affected by a projection effect (Gopalswamy et al. 2000b). Viewing in the plane of the sky does not allow us to determine the crucial parameters defining geoeffectivness of CMEs, such as the velocity, width or source location. Prediction of the arrival of CME in the vicinity of Earth is critically important in space weather investigations. Basing on interplanetary shocks detected by Wind and the corresponding CMEs detected by SOHO, Gopalswamy et al. (2000a) developed and next (Gopalswamy, 2001) improved an empirical model to predict the arrival of CMEs at 1AU. The critical element affecting this model is the initial CME speed. The better prediction could be achieved if real initial velocities are used instead projected velocities determined from LASCO observations. Similarly, attempts made to estimate the projection effect based on the location of the solar source employ ad hoc assumptions on parameter such as the width of CMEs (Sheeley et al. 1999, Leblanc and Dulk, 2000). In the present paper we try to determine these crucial parameters defining geoeffectivness of CMEs, such as the velocity, width or source location. We assume that halo CMEs at the beginning phase of propagation have a constant velocities, are symmetric and propagate with constant angular widths. Using these approximations and determining projected velocities and difference between times when CME appears on the opposite sides of the occulting disk we are able to get necessary parameters. We present results for the whole halo CMEs from SOHO/LASCO catalog until the and of 2000.

The cone model of CME

Typical limb CMEs observed by the LASCO coronagraph look like ejected blobs of magnetized plasma with magnetic fields anchored to the sun surface. This allow them to keep almost cone shape during expansion through the C2 and C3 fields of view. The observed angular widths, for many limb events, remain nearly constant as a function of height (Webb et al. 1997, our founding during work on SOHO/LASCO catalog). Most of them propagate with constant radial frontal speed but many slow CMEs gradually accelerate and fast CMEs decelerate (St. Cyr et al., 2000; Sheeley et al 1999., Yashiro et al., 2002). Assuming that the halo CME propagate with a constant velocity and angular width we can reproduce it by the cone model with four free parameters such as the velocity, angular width and the orientation of the central axis. So we assume that bulk velocity of ejected blob is pointed radially and isotropically. In the Fig. 1. schematically we show the basic properties of our model. These assumptions should be true at the beginning phase of CME expansion at least. In the projection on the symmetry plane it looks like a triangle represented by solid thick arrows. The central axis of our CME is imaged by the dashed thick arrow. Its inclination to the plane of sky is equal γ. Each parts of this cone (triangle in projection) has a constant real velocity V. The CME with the angular width α is ejected from the Sun at distance r from the central meridian. Opposite parts of CMEs have velocities, projected on the plane of sky, equal respectively [formula] and [formula]. In the bottom of the picture we see the occulting disk of the LASCO/C2 coronagraph. We have to note that it is only schematic picture without a real scale. We may observe that if CME originates exactly in the center of the Sun it will appear at the same time around the entire occulting disk. But if the source location of CME is slightly shifted (=r)in respect to the center of the Sun (for example like in our picture) then CME will first appear at the left (east) side of the occulting disk and finally at the right (west) side of the occulting disk. Since this time we can see in the LASCO picture full halo CME ring but slightly asymmetric in respect to the occulting disk. The clue of this method is based on this asymmetry, in other words on the difference between times when CME appears at the opposite sides (first and finally appearance) of the occulting disk. Considering situation from our picture we can say that to see CME at the left (east) side of the occulting disk it has to travel, in the plane of sky, distance equal 2R - r with velocity [formula]. For this work CME needs time T1 equal

[formula]

Similarly, CME will appear on the right (west) side of the occulting disk after time equal

[formula]

From these equations we determine the difference time

[formula]

From the geometry of CME shown in the Fig. 1. we get the rest necessary equations

[formula]

[formula]

[formula]

We have four equations and four parameters to determine r, α, V and γ. Vx1, Vx2 and ΔT we have to get from LASCO observations.

Determination parameters describing halo CMEs

Now we have to determine Vx1, Vx2 and ΔT from LASCO observations. It is not so easy because typically the halo CMEs are very faint and in addition their structure is very complicated. We consider the whole halo events from SOHO/LASCO catalog until the end of 2000. From LASCO observations we obtained two height-time plots for each halo CME from our sample. The first height-time plot is for this part of event which appears first from the occulting disk. It is extrapolated to estimate time (T1) when this part of CME, in the plane of sky, reaches heliocentric distance [formula] and to estimate velocity Vx1. The second height-time plot is used to determine the same parameters (T2 and Vx2) but in the opposite side of the occulting disk where the halo CME appears at last. An example of 1999/06/28 CME observed by LASCO is present in the Fig. 2 (figure is to big to see it in this archive). In the first panel at the time T0 we do not see any new event. In the next panel, in the north-west quadrant of the Sun, CME appears at time 07:31. From the height-time plot we determine T1 = 07:19 and Vx1 = 635km / s. In the next panel, the final part of CME appears in the south-west quadrant of the Sun. From this part we determined T2 = 07:34 and Vx2 = 515km / s. In the fourth panel we can see the full image of the halo CME at last. The thick solid arrow present the axis along which the respective parameters are determined. The position angle (PA = angle between north pole of the sun and part of the halo CME where the Vx1 is determined) is indicated also. So the difference time for this event will be ΔT  =  T2 - T1 = 15min. Now from equations (1, 2, 3 and 4) describing our CME model we can determine the V, width and parameter r.

Results

We made the same consideration for the rest events from our sample. The results are present in the three tables. Three first columns are got from the SOHO/LASCO catalog (date, time and projected speed from LASCO observations). Next, in four columns we have data received from our considerations of LASCO images (PA,Vx1,Vx2,ΔT). Parameters estimated from our cone model (r,γ,α,V) are presented in columns 8,9,10 and 11. We also put, in a column 12, a short characteristic of a given event. Numbers from the range 0.0 until 3.0 describe quality of a given CME. The letter F informs that we have frontside, B backside and B? probably backside halo CME. If a halo CME is to faint to measure at list two hight-time points to determine velocity we could not estimate necessary parameters so we left empty space in our table and put quality 0 in the column 12. Similarly, we could not determine the parameters for the symmetric halo CMEs. This situation appears when asymmetry in velocity is less than 10km/s minutes or in the difference time less than 10 minutes. In this case we put 'Sym' into column 12. In column 13, if it is possible, we identified the source location from GEOS X-flare onset.

Properties of the halo CMEs

In the three tables we present list of the halo CMEs covering period of time from August 1996 until the end of 2000. We have to note that not all halo CMEs look identical. We have to consider two types of halo CMEs. First, the classical full halo CMEs which appear to surround the occulting disk very fast in the C2 LASCO coronagraph. Generally they originate from close the disk center. Second, the wide limb CMEs which surround the entire occulting disk very late, often in the field of view of the C3 LASCO coronagraph. Sometimes limb events appears as halo due to deflections of pre-existing coronal structures by the fast CME. So we have to be very careful to distinguish between a real halo CME and a limb fast event deflecting coronal material. We were able to determine the respective parameters for 73th CMEs from our sample. The rest CMEs had to more complicated structures, were to faint or symmetric and it was to difficult to accomplish necessary measurements. In the three histograms (Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5) we present distribution of V, α, and γ. Here it is important to note the halo CMEs seem to be much wider and faster than typical events taken from the SOHO/LASCO catalog (Yashiro et al. 2002). The average wide of halo CME is approximately equal 120o (more than two times that the value received from the SOHO/LASCO catalog). The narrowest CME has width equal 40o and the widest one has the cone angle as large as 172o. The average speed of the halo CMEs is 1080km / s (abut two times more than the one from SOHO/LASCO catalog). The slowest one achieves velocity equal 95km / s when the fastest is ejected with velocity 2590km / s. Fig. 5 show that the halo CMEs originate close to the sun center (with γ  ≥  60o ) with maximum of distribution around γ = 65o. We have to remember that in our consideration the symmetric CMEs which start exactly from the sun center are not included. If we consider them the maximum of γ distribution could be shifted to the central meridian. In the Fig. 6 we present the sky plane speeds against corrected (real) velocities. The solid line represents linear fit to the data points. The inclination of the linear fit suggests that the projection effect slightly increases with speed of CMEs. It is clear that the projection effect is important and in average the corrected speeds are 20 percents larger than the velocities measured in the plane of sky.

Summary

In this paper we present possibility to estimate the crucial parameters determining geoeffectiveness of the halo CMEs. The clue of this method is based on the difference between times when the halo CME appears at the opposite sides (first and finally appearance) of the occulting disk. We considered the whole events form SOHO/LASCO catalog until the end of 2000. We were able to determine the real velocity, width and source location for 73th CMEs from our sample. Unfortunately, 58 events were symmetric or too faint to do necessary considerations. Results are listed in the three successive tables. This list could be use for further statistical examination or to prediction of the arrival of CME in the vicinity of Earth. Presented results suggest that the halo CMEs represent a specific class of CMEs which are very wide and fast. Using our results we have to remember that the simple model has several shortcomings: (i) CMEs may be accelerating, moving with constant speed or decelerating at the beginning phase of propagation. This means the constant velocity we assumed may not hold. (ii) CMEs may expand in addition to radial motion. Then the measured sky-plane speed is a sum of the expansion speed and the projected radial speed. This also would imply that the CMEs may not be a rigid cone as we assumed (Gopalswamy et al. 2001) (iii) The cone symmetry also may not hold. CME originating from loop structure could be elongated. All these limits can be overcome by stereoscopic observations only. Unfortunately, at the present time they are not available yet. It is necessary to develop the model to get the better fit to observations. The first step to improve our model could be achieved by consideration of acceleration and expansion of CMEs. Acknowledgments This paper was done during work of Grzegorz Michalek at Center for Solar and Space Weather, Catholic University of America in Washington. In this paper we used data from SOHO/LASCO CME catalog. This CME catalog is generated and maintained by the Center for Solar Physics and Space Weather, The Catholic University of America in cooperation with the Naval Research Laboratory and NASA. SOHO is a project of international cooperation between ESA and NASA. Work done by Grzegorz Michalek was partly supported by Komitet Bada Naukowych through the grant PB 258/P03/99/17.

References

Gopalswamy, N., et al., Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 145, 2000a Gopalswamy, N., et al., Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 1427, 2000b Gopalswamy, N., et al., J. Geophys. Res., 106, 292907, 2001 Gopalswamy, N., 2001 Coronal Mass ejection:Initiation and Detection????? Howard R.A., et al., Astrophys. J., 263, L101, 1982 Leblanc, Y., Dulk, G.A., J. Geophys. Res., 106, 25301, 2001 Sheeley, N.R., Jr., Walters, J.H., Wang, Y.-M., Howard, R.A., J. Geophys. Res., 104, 24739, 1999 St. Cyr, O.C., et al., J. Geophys. Res., 105, 18169, 2000 Webb, D.F., et al., J. Geophys. Res., 102, 24161, 1997 Yashiro, S., et al.,in preparation, 2002