Dust penetrated arm classes: insight from rising and falling rotation curves

Introduction

The classification of galaxies, i.e. Hubble type, has traditionally been inferred in the optical regime, where dust extinction still has a large affect, and the light is dominated by the young Population I stars. Infrared arrays offer opportunities for deconvolving the Population I and Population II morphologies, because in the K-band (2.2 μm), dust extinction is minimal, and the light is dominated by old Population II stars. The extinction at this wavelength is only 10% of that in the V-band (Martin & Whittet 1990).

Hubble type is not correlated with the Population II morphology, as confirmed by the near-infrared studies of de Jong (1996) and Seigar & James (1998a, b). Also, it has been shown that near-infrared morphologies of spiral galaxies are often vastly different from their optical morphologies (Block & Wainscoat 1991; Block et al. 1994a; Thornley 1996; Seigar & James 1998a, b; Seigar, Chorney & James 2003). Often galaxies with flocculent spiral structure in the optical appear to have Grand-Design spiral structure in the near-infrared (Thornley 1996; Seigar et al. 2003). This suggests that the optical morphology bears little resemblance to underlying stellar mass distribution.

Burstein & Rubin (1985) showed that spiral galaxies can have one of three different types of rotation curve, rising, flat or falling. From these rotation curve types they derived three principle types of mass distribution and found that Hubble types Sa and Sb were amongst all three types in approximately equal amounts. This supports the idea that the optical morphology is not correlated with the underlying mass distribution in spiral galaxies.

The disk of a spiral galaxy can be separated into two distinct components: the gas-dominated Population I disk, and the star-dominated Population II disk. The former component contains features of spiral structure (OB associations, HII regions, and cold interstellar HI gas). In contrast, the Population II disk contains the old stellar population highlighting the underlying stellar mass distribution (Lin 1971). One might expect, even in the absence of appreciable optical depths, for the two morphologies to be very different, since the near-infrared light comes from mainly giant and supergiant stars (Rix & Rieke 1993; Frogel et al. 1996).

One therefore needs a near-infrared classification scheme, such as the dust-penetrated class (Block & Puerari 1999; Block et al. 1999) to describe the Population II disk, as well as Hubble type to describe the Population I disk. The dynamic interplay between the two components (via a feedback mechanism) is crucial, and has been studied extensively (Bertin & Lin 1996). A central aspect here is the likely coupling of the Population I disk with that of the Population II disk via a feedback mechanism (Pfenniger et al. 1996).

The theoretical framework to explain the co-existence of completely different morphologies within the same galaxy when it is studied optically and in the near-infrared is described by Bertin & Lin (1996). A global mode (Bertin et al. 1989a, b) is composed of spiral wavetrains propagating radially in opposite directions. Thus a feedback of wavetrains is required from the center. The return of wavetrains back to the corotation circle is guaranteed by refraction, either by the bulge or because the inner disk is dynamically warmer. In the stellar disk, such a feedback can be interrupted by the Inner Lindblad Resonance (ILR), which is a location where the stars meet the slower rotating density wave crests in resonance with their epicyclic frequency (Mark 1971; Lynden-Bell & Kalnajs 1972). In the gaseous disk, the related resonant absorption is only partial, so that some feedback is guaranteed. Once the above described wavecycle is set up, a self-excited global mode can be generated.

The tightness of the arms in the modal theory comes from the mass distribution and rate of shear. Galaxies with more mass concentration, i.e. higher overall densities (including dark matter) and higher shear, should have more tightly wound arms. If the disk is very light (low σ where σ is the disk density) the mode can be very tight, and one is in the domain of small epicycles. If one increases the mass of the disk one finds a trend towards more open structures, but soon one runs the risk of a disk that is too heavy and a bar mode results.

The goal of this paper is to highlight the expected correlation between the shear rate in spiral galaxies (as derived from their rotation curves) and the near-infared spiral arm pitch angle. The dust penetrated morphology depends on the near-infared spiral arm pitch angle, and so, such a correlation would provide a physical basis for the dust penetrated classification scheme of Block & Puerari (1999).

Decomposition and identification of modes

We have observed a sample of 15 galaxies in the near-infrared K-band (2.2 μm). These objects were taken from the study of Mathewson et al. (1992), who observed rotation curves for 1355 southern hemisphere spiral galaxies. Our sample includes galaxies with different rotation curve types (rising, falling and flat) and span as wide a range of optical Hubble Types as possible. The images were observed at the United Kingdom Infrared Telescope (UKIRT) using the UKIRT Fast Track Imager (UFTI) between 1-4 August 2001 and 11-12 March 2002.

The 2-D Fast Fourier decomposition of all the near-infrared images in this study, employed a program developed by I. Puerari (Schroeder et al. 1994). Logarithmic spirals are assumed in the decomposition.

The amplitude of each Fourier component is given by:

[formula]

where r and θ are polar coordinates, I( ln r,θ) is the intensity at position ( ln r,θ), m represents the number of arms or modes, and p is the variable associated with the pitch angle P, defined by [formula].

Our Fourier spectra corroborate earlier observational indications (Block et al . 1994a, 1999; Block & Puerari 1999) that there is indeed a ubiquity of m=1 and m=2 modes. Block & Puerari (1999) proposed three principle archetypes for the evolved stellar disk of such galaxies. The first of these, designated dust-penetrated class α, covers the pitch angle range [formula], the second, designated β, covers [formula] and the third, designated γ covers [formula].

Those lopsided galaxies (where m=1 is a dominant mode) are designated Lα, Lβ and Lγ according to the dust penetrated pitch angle. Evensided galaxies (where m=2 is the dominant Fourier mode) are classified into classes Eα, Eβ and Eγ. Higher order harmonics are classified as H3 (for m=3) and H4 (for m=4).

The range of radii over which the Fourier fits were applied are selected to exclude the bulge or bar (where there is no information about the arms) and extend to the outer limits of the arms in our images. Pitch angles are then determined from peaks in the Fourier spectra, as this is the most powerful method to find periodicity in a distribution (Considere & Athanassoula 1998; Garcia-Gomez & Athanassoula 1993). The images were first deprojected to face-on. Figure 1 shows the images of the spiral galaxies observed for this project, overlaid with contours representing the results of the Fourier analysis. The dust-penetrated arm classes and pitch angles are listed in Table 1.

Discussion

Block et al. (1999) showed the first evidence that the pitch angle (and therefore dust penetrated arm class) of a spiral galaxy depends upon the shear rate as derived from rotation curves, consistent with the theoretical predictions of the modal theory (Bertin et al. 1989a, b; Bertin & Lin 1996; Fuchs 1991, 2000). The work presented by Block et al. (1999) consisted of just 4 galaxies. Here we present a further 15 galaxies, all with measured rotation curves. Their shear rates are derived from their rotation curves as follows

[formula]

where A is the first Oort Constant, ω is the rotational velocity, and V is the velocity measured at radius R. The value A / ω gives the shear rate.

Figure 2 shows a plot of the shear rate of spiral galaxies versus the spiral arm pitch angle. As well as showing a good correlation, it is also interesting to note how the galaxies seem to fall into 3 distinct areas on this plot, according to both their shear rates and pitch angles, and possibly their mass distributions. Galaxies, with high shear rates (rising rotation curves) and tightly wound spiral structure are found in the bottom right and are designated α in the dust penetrated class. Galaxies with shear rates around 0.5 (flat) and moderately wound spiral structure are in the middle and are designated β. The top left contains those galaxies with loosely wound structure and low shear rates (falling). These are designated γ. Figure 3 shows a plot between rotation curve type (Burstein & Rubin 1985), i.e. rising, flat or falling, versus spiral arm pitch angle, also showing a good correlation.

The shape of a rotation curve is determined largely by the distrbution of luminous and dark mass contained in a spiral galaxy. The correlation found between pitch angle and shear rate, therefore suggests that the main factor determing the tightness of spiral structure, is in fact the central mass concentration. Essentially, a declining rotation curve is indicative of a large central bulge. The correlation between mass concentration and spiral arm pitch angle has been suggested by many theoretical models (e.g. Fuchs 1991, 2000; Bertin et al. 1989a, b; Bertin & Lin 1996).