=0

George Boole and

the Bell inequalities

Elemér E  Rosinger Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics University of Pretoria Pretoria 0002 South Africa eerosinger@hotmail.com

Abstract

As shown by Pitowsky, the Bell inequalities are related to certain classes of probabilistic inequalities dealt with by George Boole, back in the 1850s. Here a short presentation of this relationship is given. Consequently, the Bell inequalities can be obtained without any assumptions of physical nature, and merely through mathematical argument.

0. Preliminary remarks

The importance of the typically quantum phenomenon of entanglement is well known. This issue of entanglement has been, and still is of special focus in Quantum Mechanics, not least due to its intimate connection to such fundamental disputes as locality versus nonlocality, and the related literature is indeed vast. It is also of major importance in the fast emerging theory of Quantum Computation. The first time an entanglement based argument was used in a critically important manner in Quantum Theory was in the celebrated EPR paper.

Nearly three decades after the EPR paper had appeared in 1935, John Bell published in 1964 what amounted to a surprising conflict between predictions of a classical world view based on the principle of locality, and on the other hand, those of Quantum Mechanics. The classical world view based on locality led J Bell to certain inequalities which, however, proved to be contradicted by Quantum Mechanics, namely, by certain properties of suitably chosen entangled EPR pairs. And this contradiction could be observed in effective quantum mechanical experiments, such as conducted for instance in 1982 by A Aspect et.al., see Maudlin.

Here it should be mentioned again that, as often in science, the related terminology which entered the common use tends to misplace the focus. Indeed, the main point in J Bell's contribution is not about inequalities, but about the fact that they lead to the mentioned contradiction. Furthermore, there are by now a number of other similar arguments which all lead to such contradictions with Quantum Mechanics.

Needless to say, it is well known that ever since its very inception in the 1920s, Quantum Mechanics has been witnessing an ongoing foundational controversy related to its interpretation, some of the earlier major stages of this controversy being those between N Bohr and A Einstein. However, as not seldom in such human situations, a certain saturation, stationarity and loss of interest may set in after some longer period of time has failed to clarify enough the issues involved.

The surprising result of J Bell happened to appear after most of the founding fathers of Quantum Mechanics had left the scene, and proved to inaugurate a fresh line of controversies, see Bell, Cushing & McMullin, Maudlin.

Here, an attempt is presented to recall in short the essential aspects of J Bell's result. Clearly, at least to the extent that this result is essentially connected to the typically quantum phenomenon of entanglement, it may be expected to be relevant for a better understanding, and thus further development of booth Quantum Theory and Quantum Computation.

Also, a relatively less well know aspect of Bell type inequalities is presented here, namely that, these inequalities are among a larger class of purely probabilistic inequalities, a class whose study was started by George Boole, with the first results published in the appendix of his book "The Laws of Thought", back in 1854. This purely mathematical study of the respective inequalities was later further extended in the work of a number of mathematicians and probabilists, see details in Pitowsky.

Needless to say, this fact does in no way detract from the importance and merit of J Bell's result. Indeed, unlike J Bell, it is obvious that G Boole and his mentioned followers, including certain probabilists in more recent times, did not consider the quantum mechanical implications of such inequalities. In this way, the importance and merit of J Bell's result is to single out for the first time certain rather simple inequalities which are supposed to be universally valid, provided that a classical setup and locality are assumed, and then show that the respective inequalities do to a quite significant extent conflict with Quantum Mechanics, involving in this process such important issues as entanglement and locality versus nonlocality.

There is a special interest in pointing out the fact that the Bell type inequalities can be established by a purely mathematical argument, as was done, for instance, by the followers of G Boole. In this regard it is important to note that both in the work of J Bell, as well as in the subsequent one of many of the physicists who dealt with this issue, the true nature of such inequalities is often quite obscured by a complicated mix of physical and mathematical argument. Such an approach, however, is unnecessary, and can of course create confusions about the genuine meaning, scope and implications of J Bell's result.

The fact however is that regardless of the considerable generality of the framework underlying such inequalities, and thus of the corresponding minimal conditions required on locality, one can nevertheless obtain the respective inequalities through purely mathematical argument, and without any physical considerations involved, yet they turn out even to be testable empirically. And in a surprising manner, they fail tests which are of a quantum mechanical nature. And this failure is both on theoretical and empirical level. In other words, the Bell inequalities contradict theoretical consequences of Quantum Mechanics, and on top of that, they are also proven wrong in quantum mechanical experiments such as those conducted by Aspect et.al.

The impact of Bell's inequalities is only increased by the fact that they require such minimal conditions, yet they deliver a clear cut and unavoidable conflict with Quantum Mechanics.

Let us also note the following. J Bell, when obtained his inequalities, he was concerned with the issue of the possibility, or otherwise, of the so called deterministic, hidden variable theories for Quantum Mechanics. This issue arose from the basic controversy in the interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, and aimed to eliminate the probabilistic aspects involved typically in the outcome of measurements. One way in this regard was to consider Quantum Mechanics incomplete, and then add to it the so called hidden variables, thus making the theory deterministic by being able a priori to specify precisely the measurement results.

By the way, the very title of the EPR paper was raising the question whether Quantum Mechanics was indeed complete, and suggested the experiment with entangled quantum states in order to justify that questioning.

Regarding the term hidden variables, once again we are faced with a less than proper terminology. Indeed, as it is clear from the context in which this term has always been used, one is rather talking about missing variables, or perhaps variables which have been missed, overlooked or disregarded, when the theory of Quantum Mechanics was set up. Details in this regard can be found in Holland, where an account of the de Broglie-Bohm causal approach to Quantum Mechanics is presented.

In view of this historical background, the effect of Bell's inequalities is often wrongly interpreted as proving that a deterministic hidden variable theory which is subjected to the principle of locality is not possible.

However, it is important to note that such a view of Bell's inequalities is not correct. Indeed, by giving up determinism, or the hidden variables, one still remains with Bell's inequalities, since these inequalities only assume a classical framework in which the locality principle holds.

1. Boole Type Inequalities

In his mentioned book G Boole was concerned among others with conditions on all possible experience or experimentation, this being the factual background to logic and the laws of thought. Needless to say, G Boole assumed automatically a classical and non-quantum context which was further subjected to the principle of locality.

Here we shall limit ourselves to a short presentation of some of the relevant aspects. Let therefore A1, ~ . ~ . ~ . ~ ,An be arbitrary n  ≥  2 events, and for 1  ≤  i1  <  i2  <   ~ . ~ . ~ . ~   <  ik  ≤  n, let pi1,i2, ~ . ~ . ~ . ~ ,ik be the probability of the simultaneous event [formula].

One of the questions G Boole asked was as follows. Suppose that the only information we have are the probabilities p1, ~ p2, ~ . ~ . ~ . ~ ,pn of the respective individual events A1, ~ . ~ . ~ . ~ ,An. What are under these conditions on information the best possible estimates for the probabilities of [formula] and [formula] ?

G Boole gave the following answers which indeed are correct

(1.1)   [formula]

(1.2)   [formula]

And these are the best possible inequalities in general, since for suitable particular cases equality can hold in each of the four places.

A rather general related result is the so called inclusion-exclusion principle of Henri Poincaré

(1.3)   [formula]

This however requires the knowledge of the probabilities of all the simultaneous events [formula], with 1  ≤  i1  <  i2  <   ~ . ~ . ~ . ~   <  ik  ≤  n.

A question with less demanding data, yet with more of them than required in (1.1) and (1.2), is the following. Suppose we know the probabilities pi of the events Ai, with 1  ≤  i  ≤  n, as well as the probabilities pij of the simultaneous events [formula], with 1  ≤  i  <  j  ≤  n. What is then the best possible estimate for the probability of [formula] ?

Unfortunately, this question is computationally intractable, Pitowsky. However, C E Bonferroni gave some answers in 1936, one of which is that

(1.4)   [formula]

and here it is interesting to note that (1.4) generates easily 2n  -  1 other independent inequalities by the following procedure. We take any 1  ≤  i1  <  i2  <   ~ . ~ . ~ . ~   <  ik  ≤  n, and replace in (1.4) the events Ail, for 1  ≤  l  ≤  k, with their complementary sets.

Now the important fact to note is that Bell's inequalities result from (1.4) in this way, in the case of n  =  3.

It follows therefore that Bell's inequalities are of a purely mathematical nature, and as such, only depend on classical probability theory.

By the way, Boole's inequalities and its further developments have been presented in well known monographs of mathematics and probability theory, some of them as recently as in 1970, and related research has continued in mathematics and in probability theory till the present day, Pitowsky. As so often however, due to extreme specialization and the corresponding narrowing of interest, such results seem not to be familiar among quantum physicists. In this regard it may be worth mentioning that Pitowsky himself is a philosopher of science.

2. The Bell Effect

There are by now known a variety of ways which describe the phenomenon brought to light for the first time by Bell's inequalities. In order to avoid complicating the issues involved, we shall present here one of the most simple such ways, Maudlin. This phenomenon, which one can call the Bell effect is a contradiction resulting between Quantum Mechanics, and on the other hand, what can be done in a classical setup which satisfies the principle of locality. The Bell inequalities are only one of the ways, and historically the first, which led to such a contradiction. They will be presented in section 4. What is given here is a simple and direct argument leading to the mentioned kind of contradiction.

Certain entangled quantum particles can exhibit the following behaviour. After they become spatially separated, they each can be subjected to three different experiments, say, A, B and C, and each of them can produce one and only one of two results, which for convenience we shall denote by R and S, respectively. What is so uniquely specific to these entangled quantum particles is the behaviour described in the next three conditions which such particles do satisfy.

Condition 1. When both particles are subjected to the same experiment, they give the same result.

Condition 2. When one of the particles is subjected to A and the other to B, or one is subjected to B and the other to C, they will in a large number of experiments give the same result with a frequency of 3/4.

Condition 3. When one of the particles is subjected to A and the other to C, then in a large number of experiments they will give the same result with a frequency 1/4.

Now, the surprising fact is that no experiment in a classical setup in which the principle of locality holds can come anywhere near to such a behaviour. And strangely enough, that includes as well the case when two conscious participants, and not merely two physical entities would be involved. In such a case, when conscious participant are present, we shall see the experiments A, B and C as questions put to the two participants, while the results R and C will be seen as their respective answers.

Such are indeed the wonders of entanglement and of certain EPR pairs that some of their performances, like for instance those which satisfy conditions 1, 2 and 3 above, cannot be reproduced in a classical context which obeys the locality principle, even if attempted by two conscious participants.

Indeed, a simple analysis shows that the best two such conscious participants can do is to decide to give the same answers, when asked the same questions. This means that any possible strategy of the two participants has to be joint or identical, and as such, it is given by a function

~  ~  ~ f:{  ~  A,B,C  ~  }  ↦  {  ~  R,S  ~  }

Clearly, there are 8 such joint strategies, namely

(2.1)   [formula]

Now it is obvious that by choosing only these 8 join strategies, condition 1 above will be satisfied. From the point of view of satisfying conditions 2 and 3 above, the strategy pairs ( 1, 8 ), ( 4, 5 ), ( 3, 6 ) and ( 2, 7 ) are equivalent. Therefore, we only remain with four distinct strategies to consider, namely

(2.2)   [formula]

At this point the two participants can further improve on their attempt to satisfy conditions 2 and 3 above by randomizing their joint strategies. For that purpose, they can choose four real numbers [formula], such that

(2.3)   [formula]

and use their joint strategies 1, 2, 3 and 4 with the respective frequencies α,β,γ,δ. A simple computation will show that conditions 2 and 3 above will further impose on α,β,γ,δ the relations

(2.4)   [formula]

However, (2.3) and (2.4) yield

(2.5)   γ ~  =  ~   -  1 / 8

thus a contradiction.

Here it is important to note that the locality principle was assumed in (2.1) - (2.5). In other words, each of the two participants could be asked questions, without the question asked from one of them having any effect on the answer of the other. Indeed, the two participants could be asked different questions, and each of them would only reply according to the question asked, and according to their joint strategy, which they happened to use at the moment.

The fact that the setup in (2.1) - (2.5) is classical, that is, it is not specifically quantum mechanical, is obvious.

3. Bell's Inequalities

For convenience we shall consider two entangled quantum particles which are in a situation even simpler than in section 3, Cushing & McMullin. Namely, each of the particles can only be subjected to two different experiments, and as before, each such experiment can only give one of two results. In view of the specific quantum mechanical setup considered, the experiments to which the two particles are subjected can be identified with certain angles in

[formula]