The Ages of Elliptical Galaxies in a Merger Model Guinevere Kauffmann Max Planck Institut fur Extraterrestrische Physik, D 85740 Garching bei Muenchen, Germany

Introduction

There have long been two competing views on the formation history of the ellipticals galaxies we see today. One is that most of the stars in present-day galactic bulges and ellipticals were produced during a relatively short, early phase of intense star formation at high redshift. The second view is that elliptical galaxies are relative latecomers, having been produced as the result of the merging of disk galaxies drawn together by gravity as their surrounding dark matter halos coalesced.

In recent years, the second view has come to enjoy increasing popularity. Detailed numerical simulations have shown that mergers between two spiral galaxies of comparable mass lead to the production of spheroidal merger remnants with physical characteristics such density profiles, gravitational radii, mean velocity dispersions and surface brightnesses that are quite comparable to observed ellipticals (see Barnes & Henquist 1992 for a review). In addition, observational eveidence has begun to accumulate that mergers and interactions are rather common in the universe, particularly at higher redshift. Hubble Space Telescope images indicate that at redshifts ≃0.4, 25-30 percent of all galaxies show disturbed morphologies (Griffiths et al 1995). At lower redshifts, almost all the most luminous IRAS galaxies have turned out to be interacting systems, leading to the conclusion that the merging process may fuel very intense bursts of star formation (see Joseph 1990 for a review). Schweizer & Seizer (1992) present evidence indicating that the UBV colours of elliptical galaxies become systematically bluer as the amount of fine structure in these galaxies increases. If fine structure is indeed a measure of a galaxy's dynamical youth, these observations suggest that many of today's ellipticals have undergone a merger-induced starburst in the past. Likewise, analyses of the stellar ages of elliptical galaxies using absorption-line index strengths, show that the outer parts of elliptical galaxies are both older and more metal poor than the nuclei, consistent with the merger/starburst picture.

The fact remains, however, that the stellar populations of present-day elliptical galaxies appear to be rather homogeneous. The colours, mass-to-light ratios and Mg2 absorption strength of ellipticals are correlated only with their central velocity dispersions, and the scatter about these relations appears to be surprisingly small. Bower, Lucey & Ellis (1992) show that the intrinsic scatter about the U-V and V-K colour-magnitude relations for early-type galaxies in the Coma and Virgo clusters is less than 0.05 mag. This leads to the conclusion that elliptical galaxies must have formed the bulk of their stars at redshifts greater than 2, or else the observed homogeneity in the colours would require a very precise synchronization of formation epochs and star formation histories for these galaxies. Likewise, Bender, Burstein & Faber (1993) find a very tight relationship between the strength of the Mg2 index at the centre of ellipticals and their central velocity dispersions, σ. Galaxies show a mean scatter of only 0.025 mag in Mg2, versus a full range of nearly 0.35 mag in Mg2. This observed scatter sets an upper limit of 15% on the rms variation of both age and metallicity at fixed σ for bright ellipticals.

The tightness of these limits calls into question the tenability of the merger model, as merging might be expected to mix together stellar populations of quite disparate ages (Renzini 1994). In addition, a starburst accompanying the merging event would increase the amount of light contributed by young stars. However, detailed predictions of the resulting scatter in quantities such as colours and Mg2 strengths have not yet been made for any realistic theory of elliptical galaxy formation via merging. In this letter, I present results calculated for a b = 1.5 cold dark matter (CDM) universe using semi-analytic techniques. It has already been demonstrated in Kauffmann (1995) that this model provides a good fit to both the properties of cluster ellipticals seen today, and the evolution in the colours of cluster galaxies at higher redshift. The results of the analysis here show that although elliptical formation is far from a synchronized process in this model, merging does in fact take place at early enough epochs so that the scatter in the colours and mean stellar ages are in good agreement with observations.

Semianalytic Models of Elliptical Galaxy Formation

The semi-analytic models we employ are described in detail in Kauffmann, White & Guiderdoni (1993, hereafter KWG) and Kauffmann & White (1993). Application of the model to the evolution of the galaxy population in clusters at high redshift is discussed in Kauffmann (1995).

To summarize: I use an algorithm based on an extension of the Press-Schechter theory due to Bower (1991) and Bond et al (1991) to generate Monte Carlo realizations of the merging paths of dark matter halos from high redshift until the present. Dark matter halos are modelled as truncated isothermal spheres and it is assumed that as the halo forms, the gas relaxes to a distribution that exactly parallels that of the dark matter. Gas then cools and condenses onto a central galaxy at the core of each halo. Star formation and feedback processes take place as described in KWG. In practice, star formation rate in central galaxies takes place at a roughly constant rate of a few solar masses per year, in agreement with the rates derived by Kennicutt (1983) for normal spiral galaxies.

At a subsequent redshift, a halo will have merged with a number of others, forming a new halo of larger mass. All gas which has not already cooled is assumed to be shock heated to the virial temperature of this new halo. This hot gas then cools onto the central galaxy of the new halo, which is identified with the central galaxy of its largest progenitor. The central galaxies of the other progenitors become satellite galaxies, which are able to merge with the central galaxy on a dynamical friction timescale. If a merger takes place between two galaxies of roughly comparable mass, the merger remnant is labelled as an "elliptical" and all cold gas is tranformed instantaneously into stars in a "starburst".

Note that the infall of new gas onto satellite galaxies is not allowed, and star formation will continue in such objects only until their existing cold gas reservoirs are exhausted. Thus the epoch at which a galaxy is accreted by a larger halo delineates the transition between active star formation in the galaxy and passive evolution of its stellar population. The stellar populations of elliptical merger remnants in clusters hence redden as their stellar populations age. Central galaxy merger remnants in the "field" are able to accrete new gas in the form of a disk to form a "spiral" galaxy consisting of both a spheroidal bulge and a disk component. As demonstrated in KWG, this picture is able to account for the observed numbers and luminosity distributions of galaxies of different morphologies, both in clusters and in lower-density environments.

The spectrophotometric models of Bruzual & Charlot (1993) are used to tranlate the predictions of the models into observed quantities such as magnitude and colour, which may be compared directly with the observational data. In this letter, I focus on the ages and colours of the stars of the elliptical merger remnants as predicted by the model. The cosmological initial conditions are a b = 1.5 CDM universe with Ω = 1 and H0  =  50 km s- 1 Mpc- 1.

The Ages and Colours of Elliptical Galaxies

Figure 1 shows the V luminosity-weighted mean stellar age of the galaxies in a cluster of [formula]. The symbols in the plot represent the morphological type of the galaxy: large filled circles correspond to ellipticals, open squares are SOs, small filled circles are spirals and pinwheels denote ellipticals which have been formed by a recent merging event (<   1 Gyr ago). The classification into morphological type is based on the B-band disk-to-bulge ratio of the galaxy, as given in Table 3B of Simien & de Vaucouleurs (1986). As can be seen, the stellar populations of spiral galaxies span a very wide range in age, but those of early-type galaxies are confined to ages between 8 and 12.5 Gyr. For our adopted cosmological parameters, this means that the bulk of stars in elliptical and SO galaxies were formed at redshifts exceeding 1.9.

The age distribution of early-type galaxies found in halos in the mass range [formula] is plotted in figure 2a. These galaxies either occur in small groups, or have no companion of comparable luminosity, and thus can be regarded as "field" ellipticals. In order to get a sizeable sample of these objects, it was necessary to combine the populations of 30 such low-mass halos. The faint field ellipticals have ages comparable to early-type galaxies in clusters. At brighter magnitudes, early-type galaxies tend to have considerably younger stellar populations. This is because these objects are all central galaxies, which continuously accrete gas from the surrounding halo and thus manufacture stars right up to the present day. Figure 2b shows results for galaxies in more massive groups ([formula].

Table 1 lists the mean stellar ages and the rms standard deviation for the ellipticals and the ellipticals+SOs in both clusters and groups. Ellipticals in all environments have mean ages between 10.5-11 Gyr with a scatter in age of around 10 percent. If all early-type galaxies are considered, the scatter increases to 15 percent and the mean stellar age is slightly lower.

Figure 3 is a histogram of the fraction of the integrated V-band light of a cluster elliptical or spiral galaxy contributed by stars which form at a given epoch. The solid line represents the average contribution, while the filled squares and cicles represent the maximum and minimum contributions respectively. The difference between the average star formation history of a cluster elliptical and spiral is illustrated clearly in this diagram. A large fraction of the V-band light of spirals comes from stars that formed in the past 5 Gyr, whereas on average, this contribution is negligible in ellipticals. It should be noted, however, that a small subset of elliptical galaxies do exhibit substantial star formation at late epochs. The dotted line in the top panel of figure 3 illustrates the epoch at which elliptical galaxies typical underwent their last major merging event. As can be seen, most ellipticals are formed by a merger that occurred between 5 and 10 Gyr ago.

Finally, in figure 4, I have used the evolutionary synthesis models of Bruzual & Charlot (1993) to generate a scatterplot of the U-V and V-K colours of early-type galaxies in clusters. In U-V, the average colour of an elliptical is 1.37 with a rms standard deviation, σ, of 0.034. In V-K, the mean is 3.01 and σ is 0.045. The rms is calculated using the Median Absolute Difference technique so that the results may be compared directly with the data of Bower, Lucey & Ellis (1992). If SO galaxies are included, the rms increases to ≃ 0.07. Although the mean colours are roughly comparable to the average colours in the data of Bower et al, there is no correlation bewteen the colour and the magnitude of the galaxy, in contradiction with the observations, which show strong reddening in the stellar populations of elliptical galaxies with increasing luminosity. As shown in figure 1, cluster elliptical galaxies of all luminosities have roughly the same mean stellar age, so any trend in colour would have to result from metallicity differences between galaxies of different masses. The rms scatter in the colour of the model ellipticals is well within the upper limit for the intrinsic scatter in the colour of Coma and Virgo ellipticals quoted by Bower, Lucy & Ellis (1992). The inclusion of the SO population increases the scatter by a factor of two. It is interesting that Bower et al also found that the removal of SO galaxies caused the scatter to decrease in their data, but not by as much as a factor of 2. However, it is clear that in the model, the scatter quoted for the early-type population will depend on the precise value of the disk-to-bulge ratio at which a galaxy is labelled as being "early-type".

A Simple Chemical Enrichment Model

Faber (1973) discovered that metal line strengths (eg Mg2) increase with luminosity among elliptical galaxies and interpreted this rise a due to an increase in metallicity with increasing mass. All subsequent studies that have analyzed Mg2 using good data and large samples, have shown that the relationship between Mg2 and the central velocity dispersion σ is tight for bright ellipticals (Terlevich et al 1981; Dressler 1984; Dressler et al 1987; Burstein et al 1987; Bender, Burstein & Faber 1993 (BBF)). The residuals of Mg2 on σ have a Gaussian core with a standard deviation of around 0.02 mag. Fainter galaxies tend to have higher dispersion than the brighter ones.

This scatter can be translated into age or metallicity variations using population synthesis models. BBF derive the following approximate relation:

[formula]

where Z denotes metallicity and t denotes age. Thus if the intrinsic dispersion in Mg2 is attributed solely to an age dispersion, the rms spread in age at fixed σ must be less than 15 percent. Likewise, if the Mg2 dispersion is due to metallicity alone, this implies that the scatter in Z is also about 15%. In the previous section, it was demonstrated that the model prediction for the scatter in the ages of elliptical galaxies is around 10%. The next obvious question to ask is whether metallicity variations amongst these galaxies would increase the scatter by a substantial amount.

To address this question, I have chosen to include a very simple prescription for chemical evolution in the models. The aim of the exercise is to see whether the scatter in Mg2 can still match observations when metallicity is allowed to vary according to the star formation history of a galaxy. The assumptions of the model are as follows: All stars that form produce a certain yield y of heavy elements, which is then added to the cold gas component of the galaxy. It is assumed that all metals are mixed instantaneously and uniformly with the cold gas and that new stars that form will have the metallicity of this enriched gas. The injection of cold gas back into the surrounding halo by supernova feedback will in turn enrich the hot intergalactic medium. In practice, supernovae explosions may be energetic enough to inject a certain fraction of heavy elements directly into the halo, without any mixing into the cold gas taking place. Metal enrichment of the hot halo gas is ignored here as it would introduce additional parameters into the model. The yield y is considered a free parameter and is adjusted so that the central galaxy of a halo with circular velocity Vc  =  220 km s- 1 will have solar metallicity on average.

Figures 5a and b show the distribution in metallicity and Mg2 index for elliptical galaxies in both clusters and groups. There is a clear trend for fainter galaxies to have lower metallicities, but it is not strong enough to account for the strong correlation between Mg2 and velocity dispersion seen in the data. The solid line in figure 5b is the Mg2-σ relation derived by BBF, where σ has been converted into V-magnitude using the Faber-Jackson relation : (L / L*)  =  (σ  /  220 km s- 1)4 and M*(V) =  - 20.7. One obvious way to steepen the correlation between Mg2 and σ would be to assume that more massive galaxies are more easily able to retain heavy elements liberated by supernova explosions and reprocess them in stars. In less massive galaxies, the energy of the explosion is sufficient to cause much of this material to be ejected into the intergalactic medium. Nonetheless it is encouraging that the scatter obtained in the Mg2 relation is in good agreement with observations. At a fixed V-band absolute magnitude, galaxies brighter than MV =  - 20 have a rms standard deviation ≃ 0.02. For fainter systems, the rms scatter increases to ≃0.03.

Conclusions

In this letter, I have calculated the scatter in the mean ages of the stellar populations of early-type galaxies, as predicted by a model in which ellipticals and bulges form by mergers of spiral disks in a universe where structure grows by a process of hierarchical clustering. The V-luminosity weighted mean stellar ages of ellipticals in the model lie in the range 8 to 12.5 Gyr, implying that the bulk of the stars in these galaxies were formed at redshifts exceeding 1.9. The scatter in the mean ages of the model E and SO galaxies is ≃ 10-15 %, well within the limits set by the data of Bender, Burstein & Faber (1993) provided the intrinsic dispersion in the Mg2 index of observed ellipticals is attributed solely to dispersion in age. The predicted scatter in the U-V and V-K colours of cluster ellipticals is less than the upper limit in the intrinsic scatter of elliptical galaxies in the Coma and Virgo clusters quoted by Bower, Lucy & Ellis (1992). The addition of later types increases the scatter substantially and again this seems to agree with observations. Finally, I have investigated the effect of metallicity variation by incorporating a very simple prescription for chemical evolution into the model. The metallicity of galaxies then varies a result of differences in their star formation histories. Although this model is not definitive, it is encouraging that the mean scatter in Mg2 is still within observational bounds. The main conclusion of this work, therefore, is that the observed "homogeneity" in the stellar populations of elliptical galaxies does not pose any real problem for the merger picture.

Acknowledgments  I thank Ralph Bender and Steve Zepf for helpful discussions.

Table 1. Mean stellar age and rms standard deviation

Barnes, J.E. & Hernquist,L. 1992, Ann.Rev.Astr.Ap., 30, 705

Bender, R., Burstein, D. & Faber, S.M. 1993, ApJ, 411, 153 (BBF)

Bond, J.R., Cole, S., Efstathiou, G. & Kaiser, N. 1991, ApJ, 379, 440

Bower, R. 1991, MNRAS, 248, 332

Bower, R., Lucey, J.R. & Ellis, R.S. 1992, MNRAS, 254, 601

Bruzual, G. & Charlot, S. 1993, ApJ, 405, 538

Burstein, D., Davies, R.L., Dressler, A., Faber, S.M., Stone, R.P.S., Lynden-Bell, D., Terlevich, R.J. & Wegner, G. 1987, ApJ, 313, 42

Dressler, A. 1984, ApJ, 281, 512

Dressler, A., Lynden-Bell, D., Burstein, D., Davies, R.L., Faber, S.M., Terlevich, R.J. & Wegner, G., 1987, ApJ, 313, 42

Faber, S.M. 1973, ApJ, 179, 423

Faber, S.M., Trager, S.C., Gonzalez, J.J. & Worthey, G., 1995, preprint

Griffiths, R.E. et al 1995, ApJ, in press

Joseph, R.D. 1990, in Dynamica and Interactions of Galaxies, ed Wielen, R. (New York:Springer), 132

Kauffmann, G. & White, S.D.M. 1993, MNRAS, 261, 921

Kauffmann, G., White, S.D.M. & Guiderdoni, B. 1993, MNRAS, 264, 201 (KWG)

Kauffmann, G. 1995, MNRAS, in press

Kennicutt, R.C. 1983, ApJ, 272, 54

Renzini, A. 1995, in Stellar Populations, ed Gilmore, G. & van der Kruit, P. (Dordrecht:Kluwer), in press

Schweizer, F. & Seitzer, P., 1992, AJ, 104, 1039

Simien, F. & De Vaucouleurs, G. 1986, ApJ, 302, 564

Terlevich, R., Davies, R.L., Faber, S.M. & Burstein, D. 1981, MNRAS, 196, 381

Figure 1: The V-luminosity weighted mean stellar ages of the galaxies in two clusters of mass [formula]. Large filled circles represent elliptcals, open squares are SOs, small filled circles are spirals and 3-pronged pinwheels are elliptical galaxies that were formed my a major merger in the past Gigayear.

Figure 2: The mean ages of the early-type galaxies in a) halos with masses of [formula]. b) halos of mass [formula]. Symbols are as in figure 1.

Figure 3: The fraction of the total V-band light of cluster elliptical or spiral galaxies contributed by stars which form at a given epoch. The solid line is the average star formation history. The squares and circles represent the maximum and minimum contributions to the total light for any galaxy at that epoch. The dotted line is a histogram of the percentage of elliptical galaxies that experienced their last major merger at a given epoch.

Figure 4:The distribution in U-V and V-K colour of early-type galaxies in a cluster of [formula]. Filled circles are ellipticals and open squares are SOs.

Figure 5: a) The metallicities of early-type galaxies in clusters derived from a simple chemical enrichment models (see text). b) The distribution in Mg2 index. Filled circles are ellipticals and open squares are SOs.