On the role of relativistic effects in X-ray variability of AGN

Introduction

X-ray emission from AGN is thought to be produced in the very central regions of accretion flow, close to the black hole, since this is where most of the gravitational potential energy is dissipated. Observational evidences for this come from results of modeling of spectral features, often showing distortions consistent with those caused by Doppler effects and gravitational redshift. In particular, broad profiles of the Fe Kα line are currently the best evidences for the very central X-ray generation and reprocessing.

Geometrical models of X-ray emitting accretion flows are of two kinds: the accretion disk with a corona scenario, and a hot flow scenario. These were extensively studied in the context of X-ray binaries, where the wealth of data enables putting stronger constraints on the geometry of accretion flow than in the case of AGN. In the former scenario the standard Keplerian accretion disk extends to the last stable orbit and the hard X-rays are produced by an active corona above the disk. This is motivated mainly by the solar corona where magnetic flares are thought to be powered by differential rotation of the Sun's interior. The hot flow scenario is based on an alternative solutions of accretion flow, where the flow is optically thin and hot, most likely two-temperature, with proton temperature reaching the virial value. Both the observational data and the theoretical arguments suggest that the two solutions operate in different ranges of mass accretion rate.

Presence of spectral features from X-ray reprocessing by cold optically thick plasma, with strong relativistic distortions obviously implies that the disk has to extend to the last stable orbit. This is the situation in, e.g., the Seyfert 1 galaxy MCG-6-30-15, which is currently the best example of effects of strong gravity in X-ray spectra. In this contribution we study some of the consequences of the relativistic effects on the variability of X-ray emission.

Quasi-periodic modulation of X-rays from rotating sources

Assume that the hard X-rays are produced by magnetic flares co-rotating with the Keplerian disk. Assume further that durations of the flares are consistent with the flare avalanche model of [\citet=pf99], so that there is a broad distribution of the durations (superposition of flare profiles of different durations explains the slope of the power spectrum). Then, the natural association of a flare time scale with the Keplerian time scale (so that longer flares are produced further away), results in the radial X-ray emissivity increasing with radius, which is clearly inconsistent with the dissipation rate of gravitational energy [\citep=ptz02]. Abandoning this association leads to a possibility of long flares occurring at small distances (tflare  ≫  tKepler). The X-rays source can then participate in the Keplerian motion, possibly for a number of tKepler, which produces a periodic modulation of emission due to Doppler boost. The strength of the resulting quasi-periodic signal in the PDS depends on the black hole spin, inclination angle and other details of the radial distribution of flares. For parameters appropriate for the Seyfert galaxy MCG-6-30-15, where [formula] and [formula], the strength of the predicted signal is high enough for the signal, if present, to be detected in the XMM-Newton data [\citep=ptzan05]. However, the data do not reveal such a signal. This would suggest that the X-rays cannot be produced by co-rotating flares, but rather by a structure not participating in the Keplerian rotation, e.g., the base of a jet. On the other hand, a number of observations show periodic variability of the energy of a narrow Fe Kα line, suggesting line production in localized regions co-rotating with the disk (T. J. Turner, these proceedings). If the two properties - no QPO signal in the primary emission and a periodic modulation of the Fe line - turn out to be universal, this will clearly suggest a non-trivial geometry of the X-ray source.

The light-bending model of variability of the reprocessed component

The reprocessed component (Fe Kα line and the Compton reflected continuum) show rather weaker variability than, and uncorrelated with, the variability of the primary emission [\citep=vf04]. This is observed on a time scale of 104-105 sec, i.e., longer by a factor of ≈  10-100 than the Keplerian timescale at the inner disk (assuming [formula]). Such a reduction of variability is rather surprising, since in the simplest model the reprocessed component should respond to primary variations on the light travel timescale. The latter is very short, if indeed the reprocessing takes place close to the center, as evidenced by the broad profiles of the Fe Kα line.

The light bending model, formulated by [\citet=mf04], postulates that the de-coupling of variations is due to changing amount of relativistic effects, in particular bending of light trajectories from the source to the accretion disk, as the location of the source changes. In its basic form the model assumes that the intrinsic emission is constant, and the observed variability is solely due to changing location of the primary source. The variability of the reprocessed component is reduced because reprocessing takes place in a more extended area. [\citeauthor=mf04] demonstrate that in the simple geometry of an off-axis source moving vertically, the model predicts reduction of line variability of a factor of ≈  7, as the source height changes from 1 to 20Rg.

We have extended the MF model to consider a number of geometrical scenarios: in addition to the basic model (C - the same as in MF), where the source is located off-axis, at projected radial distance ρs, and moves vertically, we considered an on-axis source (model A) moving vertically and a source located very low above the disk surface, moving radially (model S). Photon transfer in the Kerr metric was computed with the code described in detail in [\citet=ptzan05]. We first computed time averaged profile of the Fe Kα line in order to find the range of parameters where the profile match that observed in MCG-6-30-15. Then, we computed variability of the line vs. that of the primary emission, as the source location changes. Details are presented in Niedwiecki & ycki (in preparation).

Our results are somewhat different than those of MF. For a = 0.998 and [formula], in model C (with ρs = 2  Rg), we find that the observed line profile requires a very low height of the source, [formula]. The profile computed for hs  =  8  Rg (as in MF) has a rather weak red wing, certainly not compatible with what is observed in MCG-6-30-15 (see Fig. [\ref=zyckifig:kaprof]a). Similar profiles can be obtained in model S, where the source radial position changes around 2-3Rg (Fig [\ref=zyckifig:kaprof]b).

We then addressed the problem of reduced variability of the Kα line and we computed the luminosity of the primary source vs. that of the Fe Kα line, as the source position is changed. Our results are plotted in Fig. [\ref=zyckifig:ff] for a number of models. In model C we find no reduction of variability of the line in contrast to results of MF, especially for source height hs  ~  10  Rg. This is most likely caused by differences in the assumed value of the outer disk radius: 600  Rg in our case compared to 100  Rg in MF computations. This latter value is too small for the line to be computed correctly when the height of the source is [formula].

We find a significant reduction of line variability in model S, for a source moving radially very low above the disk surface. Source position changing between rs = 1.23-4  Rg produces line flux changes by a factor of ≈  7 compared to a factor of ≈  100 for the continuum. This is primarily a result of light bending to the equatorial plane, beyond r  ≈  6, where a relatively constant blue horn is then produced (Niedwiecki & ycki, in preparation). Note, though, that model S would predict the strong signal in PDS (on Keplerian timescale) which is not observed (Sec [\ref=zyckisec:qpo]).