= 1.25in .125in .25in

The Statistical Properties Of The Very Weak Radio Source Population In The GOODS/ACS HDF-N Region

Introduction

Deep galaxy studies at visible and infra-red wavelengths have indicated that early galaxies merge to form larger systems in a 'bottom-up' scenario of galaxy assembly. This implies that galaxy-galaxy interactions were common at early epochs. Such interactions at modest redshifts are seen to trigger major star-formation activity and it is well established that star-formation rate density increases dramatically out to redshifts of ~  1 [\citep=madau98]. The star-formation rate for such galaxies can be estimated from both the centimetric radio and far infra-red (FIR) luminosities which have been found to be tightly correlated over several orders of magnitude [\citep=vanderkruit73] [\citep=condon82].

Differential radio source counts at 1.4GHz (See Figure 1) show an increase at flux densities below 1mJy [\citep=seymour04]. Multi-wavelength studies of a number of fields including deep radio observations involving the VLA, ATCA, MERLIN, and the EVN, have shown that this new weak radio source population is associated with distant star-forming galaxies.

The Initial Radio Study of the HDF-N

Deep radio observations of the HDF-N region were made with the VLA and MERLIN during 1996 and 1997. The VLA results were presented in Richards al. (1998) and Richards (2000), and the combination high angular resolution results were presented in Muxlow [formula] (2005). Within a 10 arcminute square field centred on the HDF, 92 radio sources were detected by the VLA at 1.4GHz above a completeness limit of 40μJy/beam (5.3σ) using a 2 arcsecond beam. Combination high-resolution MERLIN+VLA images involving 42 hours of VLA observations and 18 days of MERLIN data were made for small regions around each of the 92 detected sources. The rms noise level in the combination images was ~  3.3μJy per 0.2 arcsecond beam making these images some of the most sensitive yet produced at 1.4GHz.

The full results of the study of the individual radio sources in the 10 arcminute field surrounding the HDF-N are given in Muxlow [formula] (2005) and are summarized below:

[formula] Within the 10x10 arcminute field there are 92 radio sources with flux densities at 1.4GHz >  40μJy.

[formula] The radio sources have angular sizes in the range 0.2 to 3 arcseconds.

[formula] 85% of the radio sources are associated with galaxies brighter than 25th magnitude in the v-band.

[formula] The remaining 15% are optically faint or extremely red objects lying at high redshift, some of which are detected at sub-mm wavebands.

[formula] The radio sources can be characterised as AGN or starburst according to their radio structures with starburst systems being identified as those with steep radio spectral indices and radio structures extended on (sub-)galactic scales overlaying the central region of the optical galaxy.

[formula] Below 60μJy the radio sources are dominated by starburst type systems (See Figure 2).

[formula] The starburst systems typically have radio luminosities significantly greater than that of nearby well-studied starbursts such as M82 or Arp220.

[formula] Some high redshift starburst systems show evidence for embedded AGN [\citep=garrett01].

A New Study of the Very Weak Radio Source Population

The initial investigation has been extended to include a statistical study of the very weak radio source population in the HDF-N region utilising ancillary data obtained from the large multi-wavelength Great Observatories Origins Survey (GOODS). The GOODS North region partially overlies the original field, and a new wide-field contiguous combination radio image was made covering a complete 8.5 arcminute square field centred on the HDF-N which contains the region of overlap. The 8.5 arcminute square radio image covers a region of the GOODS-N field containing 13030 galaxies brighter than magnitude 28.3 in the z-band ACS catalogue.

Faint Radio Emission from Optically-selected Galaxies

The radio and optical fields are astrometrically aligned to better than 50mas. Thus the radio flux density from each of the 13030 z-band optical galaxies can be investigated by integrating the radio emission from the MERLIN+VLA image of the 8.5 arcminute square field within a radius of 0.75 arcseconds at the position of every galaxy. Radio sources brighter than 40μJy have already been reported in detail in Muxlow [formula] (2005) and were excluded from the sample. In addition, all galaxies with nearest neighbours closer than 1.5 arcseconds were also excluded so as to avoid confusion problems. The median flux densities, binned by z-band magnitude are shown in Figure 3. A control sample was also constructed which incorporated a random 7 arcseconds positional shift between the optical galaxy and the position searched in the radio image.

Radio emission is clearly detected statistically for all z-band magnitude bins brighter than 26. Of the ~  2700 galaxies brighter than z=24mag, half (nearly 1400) will have radio flux densities of ~  4μJy or greater at 1.4GHz. A 4μJy source represents an ~  8σ detection for a future deep [formula]-MERLIN+EVLA image; such galaxies which at present may only be investigated statistically will in the near future be imaged individually.

Radio Source Sizes

The angular sizes of the very weak radio sources can also be investigated statistically. In each magnitude bin the average radio source size can be derived from the radio flux densities found in annuli of width 0.25 arcseconds, over radii of 0.25 to 2 arcseconds centred on each galaxy position. These are shown in Figure 4. For detected systems brighter than z~  25mag, the average radio source radii are in the range 0.6 to 0.8 arcseconds implying that the next generation radio interferometers will need sub-arcsecond angular resolution. There is a marginal trend for the fainter radio sources to be slightly smaller. Radio source sizes may also be also be measured by fitting to the composite, stacked radio image in each magnitude bin. Similar sizes are derived by this latter method.

Starburst Luminosities

Around 1000 of the ~  13000 galaxies in the 8.5 arcminute field have published spectroscopic redshifts. We have constructed the luminosity-redshift distribution for those starburst systems with measured redshifts. For this sub-set of starbursts, the detected radio flux density stacked by z-band magnitude does not differ significantly from the complete galaxy sample (at least for those bins brighter than 24mag); indicating that the sub-set of galaxies with measured redshifts do not appear to differ significantly from the complete galaxy set. We are thus able to derive the averaged luminosity distribution for those starburst galaxies brighter than 24mag

The very weak radio sources which are assumed to be dominated by starbursts have average properties which indicate that they are an extension of the weaker end of the distribution of starbursts detected as individual sources at higher radio flux densities. Their typical luminosities are still several times that of M82. However, it should be noted that these weak radio sources have been selected by optical z-band properties and will therefore exclude optically faint systems. Most of the individual high redshift sub-mm starburst systems imaged by Muxlow [formula] (2005) were optically faint, and therefore will not be represented statistically in these results. Furthermore close galaxy pairs have also been excluded. Clearly individual imaging of these very faint systems will be required.

The Future

The new upgraded radio interferometers due to be commissioned in the next few years will be able to individually image these very faint systems. [formula]-MERLIN, EVLA, and [formula]-VLBI should be able to image in excess of 1000 individual starburst systems to flux densities of ~  4μJy at 1.4GHz with perhaps 150 to 200 objects at high redshift in a single field. For the even weaker radio source population, the new instruments will be able to extend this present statistical study to include many thousands of starburst systems with radio flux densities less then 1μJy. SKA and ALMA will ultimately extend this by an additional order of magnitude, With redshifts, improved spectral energy distribution templates and extinction-free star-formation rate indicators, it will become possible to solve for the cosmic star-formation history - the radio Madau diagram.