Numerical Program for Computing Φ3 Amplitudes

Gordon Chalmers UCLA Physics Department 405 Hilgard Ave Knudsen Hall LA, CA 90095-1547

e-mail: chalmers@physics.ucla.edu

minus .2in

Abstract

A computing program in Matlab is given that computes amplitudes in scalar φ3 theory. The program is partitioned into several parts and a simple guide is given for its use.

The scattering amplitudes in phi3 are computationally difficult at high loop orders due to the number of diagrams involved. Their number grows as (n - 1)! at n-point and at tree level. An automated program is given here that computes an arbitrary tree amplitude and then sews them together to obtain the quantum amplitudes. The program is written in Matlab and is given in several pieces.

The input parameters for the n-point amplitudes are given in the subprogram phi3compute.txt.

The subprogram NMatrix.m must be loaded with the number of external lines ranging from npointlower to npoint. These numbers span the numbers of external lines which are used in the trees that are sewn together into the loop amplitudes.

The subprograms NodalComplex.m, treecall.m, innerproduct.m, and denomcall.m are saved as files in the directory to which the program can call.

The program RainbowCompute.m is used to call the MonteCarlo simulation that computes the multi loop amplitude.

The input variables are self-explanatory in the subpart Phi3Compute.txt. They are: kmomol, kmomor delimit the four-point kinematics to the four-point amplitude, gnumber is the power of the coupling constant, d is the dimension, kstep and sample are the step size to the partitions of momenta in the loop and sample is the number of samples of the internal momenta taken. In the program RainbowCompute.m the variables are MonteRunSet denoting the number of samples, kmax is the discretized momentum, sampleX is the number of external momenta data points. The output is delivered in the array RainbowCompute and there is a subroutine to plot the output.

I typically call all of the programs and then paste in the subprogram RainbowCompute.m. The time to obtain the output really varies depending on the parameters and the number of internal loops.

Background algorithms to the computations are obtained in [\cite=Chalmers1], [\cite=Chalmers2]. The program is contained in the tex source following the bibliography.

Acknowledgements

The work of GC is supported in part by the US Department of Energy, Division of High Energy Physics, contract .