Proceedings I Einstein Centenary Symposium, 303-307

On The Origin of Universe

Amongst various theories concerning the large scale structure of the Universe and its origin, the big-bang or evolutionary theory and steady state theory have been extensively discussed and developed. According to big-bang idea, the Universe started from a very hot and dense (infinite density) matter with the greatest expansion rate at the beginning and then slowing down steadily. On the other hand, steady state theory assumes that the expansion has always been going on at just its present rate and the matter is continually created to compensate for the background material. These theories are, however, inadequate to answer the following questions: What was the state before the creation of the Universe ? And, where does the Universe expand ? In the first model, the question that what happened before the big-bang can not be answered. In steady state theory the question cannot be asked meaningfully since it is assumed that the Universe as observed from a particular position and at a particular epoch is same as that observed from any other position and at any other epoch. The matter is postulated to be created from nothing. The status of the answer to the second question is very much unclear and confused in both theories.

An attempt is made to answer some of these questions starting from a new hypothesis [\cite=1] on space-time interaction contained in two postulates stated below:

There is a state, 'Superspace' which has its own energy called fundamental energy,

Time is something which operates upon the state 'Superspace' to transform the fundamental energy to known form of energy thereby creating Universe.

It would be appropriate to discuss briefly the meaning of the terms 'Superspace' and space-time interaction. The state 'Superspace' is the state before the creation of the Universe. By the universe, I mean the whole aggregate of objects consisting of matter or radiation or both. The state where neither matter nor radiation existed is called thc 'Superspace'. The energy of this state is the source for the creation of the Universe and therefore it is called the fundamental energy. Superspace by its definition acquires certain peculiar characteristics. We know that identical objects are indistinguishable, the perfect symmetry requires the absence of any discontinuity and measurement loses its meaning for infinite extent. The concepts of dimensionality, origin and boundary are, therefore, meaningless for the state 'Superspace'. The fundamental energy is uniformly distributed throughout the 'Superspace'. The second postulate gives a special place to time as a dynamical operator. The fundamental energy associated with the 'Superspace' is transformed to some radiation, when time operates upon the 'Superspace'. The space time interaction, as I call it, where started, can not be asked because of the perfect symmetry of 'Superspace'. However, there was certainly a beginning for our Universe, because every change has beginning. Moreover, once the interaction takes place, a finite, bounded and well defined region will come into existence. The measurement sense of both space and time also enters into picture as soon as space-time interaction takes place. That the energy conversion took place in zero time or instantaneously has no meaning implies that some finite elementary time interval, τ, exists during which fundamental energy gets transformed into some radiation. The Nature should not be irregular and partial for any specific time then implies that in each time interval τ, an amount of energy, F gets converted to some radiation.

Thus the elementary time interval, τ, is a basic and absolute unit of time provided by the Nature. Further the product of F and τ is also constant. Now the converted energy in the form of radiations should be contained somewhere. Let us make the simplest and natural assumption to regard this spatial region as a sphere of volume Ve. Since fundamental energy is uniformly distributed and an equal amount of energy, F is converted in each time interval, τ, the volume of the Universe also increases in the steps of Ve. If the energy density is denoted by ρ, then ρVe  =  F. All the time intervals are the integral multiples of the elementary time interval but, for convenience, we replace the discrete time by a continuous time. Then at time t, the volume of the Universe is given by V  =  Vet / τ. The radius, R, and the rate of radial expansion, v, are easily calculated to be

[formula]

where K  =  (3Ve / 4πτ)1 / 3. Neglecting the second and higher order terms in τ / t, the expression for the incremental radius ΔR from time t to t  +  τ is given by

[formula]

Assuming that [formula], Planck's constant, for the typical values of ρ  =  1.9  ×  10- 9 erg cms- 3, τ  =  5.4  ×  10- 44 sec and age of the Universe, t  =  2  ×  1010 years, we get the following results: Ve  ≈  6.5  ×  1025 cm3, R  ≈  5.65  ×  1028 cm and v  ≈  2.997  ×  1010 cm/sec. If we identify ΔR with the Planck's length, (hG / 2πc3)1 / 2 where G is gravitational constant and c is the velocity of light, then the value of G is calculated to be 6.707  ×  10- 8  cm3gm -  1 sec  -  2. The radius of the Universe and the gravitational constant G calculnted here are in reasonable agreement with their values calcurated in other models. If we take τ  =  4.4x10- 24 sec, then it turns out that R  ≈  1014 cm, v  ≈  10- 8 cm/sec and G  ≈  105  cm3gm -  1 sec  -  2. Therefore it seems that the value of τ equal to 5.4  ×  10- 44 sec is close to the actual value of τ , though the uncertainty in other parameters ρ and age of the Universe restricts the validity of this value of τ also.

Since ΔR is not constant, we note that the Gravitational constant varies with time. If c is assumed to be constant, then [formula]. We must point out here that according to Dirac's large number hypothesis [\cite=2] [formula].

The most interesting result is that v  ≈  c. Does it mean that the velocity of light is not constant, because v  ≈  t- 2 / 3 ? The velocity of light dictates every physical process, though it is not clear, why. Einstein himself was aware of this criticism for giving such a fundamental role to the velocity of light [\cite=3]. Here we have an explanation for it. The radial expansion rate determines the maximum attainable velocity in the Universe. It is very I satisfying principle indeed, in our model because outside the physical spatial boundary of our Universe, there is the 'Superspace' containing fundamental energy. Now no energy signal can penetrate this ( Superspace' because it is incompressible  nd nonempty. Therefore. the restriction on the velocity of any signal that it can not exceed the radial expansion rate will make it impossible to cross the boundary of the Universe. Therefore the physical processes including the velocity of light-are guided bya cosmic principle.

In the simple model, one can easily calculate that the velocity of light at t  =  1010 yrs. was 4.7579739  ×  1010 cm/sec and it will be 2.287395  ×  1010 cm/sec. at t  =  3  ×  1010 yrs.

The variation of the light velocity with time will alter the concepts of fundamental constants. Dirac [\cite=4] argued that not all the three fundamental constants h / 2π,  c  and  e are fundamental. at least one is derived. If the fine structure constant is considered independent of time then e should also vary with time, since h / 2π is fundamental in our model. Dirac however insisted that c plays such an important role in four dimensional picture that it must be fundamental. Only the experiments can decide. but we expect so many new and interesting consequences will follow in case we consider that the velocity of light is not constant.

Finally we would like to give a few remarks regarding the origin of the gravitational force. One can see that [formula], as [formula]. Now, is gravity a real field ? Let us discuss it in our model. It is now a well established fact that matter energy can be converted to radiation energy and vice versa. We now invoke the principle of naturality and condensation and conservation principle of energy.

The former demands that every physical system has a tendency to attain its original state. When applied to the present situation, we find that because the 'Superspace' had uniform and homogeneous distribution of fundamental energy, the energy in the Universe always has a tendency to be uniformly distributed throughout the space. The condensation and conservation principle can be stated as follows. The energy conversion takes place in such a manner that the energy density increases, i.e. fundamental energy density <   radiation energy density <   matter energy density. The source of the matter and radiation in the Universe is the fundamental energy therefore. local energy conservation principle is a necessary corollary of our hypothesis because we can not get more energy than what is contained in 'Superspace'. When radiation and matter are created, the empty space is created inside the Universe. The naturality principle then brings out a pressure kind of thing which manifests as an attractive force. Thus qualitatively we can understand the gravitational force, which seems to be an apparent interaction.

Although a number of problems such as red shift, microwave back-ground radiation etc. have not been touched upon and the model presented here is far from being complete in the sense that the details of the large scale structure of Univarse are not discussed, the conceptual and philosophical profoundness of this model are its attractive features.