=15cm

Comment on "Negative heat and first order phase transitions in nuclei" by Moretto et al.

In their recent paper (nucl-th/0208024) Moretto et.al. come up with the statement that negative heat capacities in calculations on a lattice (Ising or Potts-model) with periodic boundaries are artificial. This continues an old and long lasting dispute I have with Moretto c.f. [\cite=gross146] [\cite=gross179] about his macroscopic picture of a microscopic process.

Here some additional remarks on our lattice simulations of the caloric curve in the q = 10 Potts model [\cite=gross150]:

In these lattice calculations the transition from ordered to disordered spin-distributions at constant volume is discussed, not the evaporation of a single drop at constant pressure.

Therefore, in a completely filled lattice at phase-separation are one to several regions with disordered spins ("bubbles") inside regions of ordered (predominantly parallel) spins. At larger excitation we have the opposite situation of phase-separation: several "droplets" of ordered spins in a disordered background.

The interface surfaces are not at all neccessarily the surface of a single spherical droplet. Only the microcanonical ensemble allows to follow the details of this methamorphosis from the ordered phase to the disordered phase. Intensive variables as pressure and temperature, used by Moretto are useless as control-parameters at phase separation in small systems and control the thermodynamics only in the thermodynamic limit and only in pure phases far away from any transition. The constructions in fig. 3 of Moretto et.al. paper are irrelevant.

At finite excitation the surfaces have of course an entropy connected to fluctuations in their shape and in their number (i.e. creation of several bubbles/droplets). This surface entropy leads to the diminishing of the surface tension which finally becomes zero at the critical point. Moretto's figure fails to catch this important physics.

And again, even if Moretto claims the contrary: Nuclear multifragmentation is not the story of a single nuclear drop embedded in its vapor at some given temperature and pressure. In nuclear fragmentation experiments there is a constant energy but neither a heat bath (temperature) nor a vapor pressure. I. e. the realistic scenario is not as trivial and macroscopic as Moretto et al. claim.

In our calculations of nuclear fragmentation [\cite=gross176] [\cite=gross95] we did of course not use periodic boundary conditions but a fixed freeze-out volume of about ~  4 - 6 times normal nuclear volume. The physical scenario I had in mind is fragments separating from their original source experience a strong and short-ranged frictional coupling as is well known from deep-inelastic collisions. This may likely lead to equilibration of the already fragmented configuration in a quite narrow freeze-out volume as it was assumed in my MMMC model [\cite=gross95].