The Infrared Astronomical Mission AKARI

AKARI is a JAXA project with the participation of ESA.

, Hideaki Fujiwara, Mikio Fujiwara, Pedro Garcia-Lario, Tomotsugu Goto, Sunao Hasegawa, Yasunori Hibi

, Takanori Hirao

, Norihisa Hiromoto, Seung Soo Hong, Koji Imai, Miho Ishigaki

, Masateru Ishiguro, Daisuke Ishihara, Yoshifusa Ita

, Woong-Seob Jeong, Kyung Sook Jeong, Hidehiro Kaneda, Hirokazu Kataza, Mitsunobu Kawada, Toshihide Kawai, Akiko Kawamura, Martin F. Kessler, Do Kester, Tsuneo Kii, Dong Chan Kim, Woojung Kim

, Hisato Kobayashi, Bon Chul Koo, Suk Minn Kwon, Hyung Mok Lee, Rosario Lorente, Sin'itirou Makiuti, Hideo Matsuhara, Toshio Matsumoto, Hiroshi Matsuo, Shuji Matsuura, Thomas G. Müller, Noriko Murakami, Hirohisa Nagata, Takao Nakagawa, Takahiro Naoi

, Masanao Narita, Manabu Noda, Sang Hoon Oh, Akira Ohnishi, Youichi Ohyama, Yoko Okada, Haruyuki Okuda, Sebastian Oliver, Takashi Onaka, Takafumi Ootsubo, Shinki Oyabu, Soojong Pak, Yong-Sun Park, Chris P. Pearson, Michael Rowan-Robinson, Toshinobu Saito, Itsuki Sakon, Alberto Salama, Shinji Sato, Richard S. Savage Stephen Serjeant, Hiroshi Shibai, Mai Shirahata, Jungjoo Sohn, Toyoaki Suzuki, Toshinobu Takagi, Hidenori Takahashi, Toshihiko Tanabé, Tsutomu T. Takeuchi, Satoshi Takita, Matthew Thomson, Kazunori  Uemizu, Munetaka Ueno, Fumihiko Usui, Eva Verdugo, Takehiko Wada, Lingyu Wang Toyoki Watabe, Hidenori Watarai

, Glenn J. White, Issei Yamamura, Chisato Yamauchi, and Akiko Yasuda

Introduction

ASTRO-F was planned as a Japanese space mission dedicated to infrared astronomy ([\cite=murakami_04], [\cite=AKARI_Sb]). It was successfully launched on 2006 February 21 (UT) on the M-V-8 rocket, which was developed by the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), from Uchinoura Space Center (USC). It was renamed AKARI after the confirmation of successful insertion of the satellite into the orbit.

AKARI is the second Japanese space mission to carry out infrared astronomy following the Infrared Telescope in Space (IRTS; [\cite=murakami_96]) onboard the Space Flyer Unit (SFU). AKARI is designed as an All-Sky Survey mission in the infrared. The primary purpose of the mission is to provide second-generation infrared catalogues to better spatial resolution and wider spectral coverage than the first catalogues by the Infra-Red Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) mission ([\cite=IRAS]). AKARI is equipped with a cryogenically cooled telescope of 68.5 cm aperture diameter and two scientific instruments, the Far-Infrared Surveyor (FIS; [\cite=FIS-Ins]) and the Infrared Camera (IRC; [\cite=IRC-Ins]). The wide fields of view (~   10 arcmin) covered by the large-format arrays in these instruments makes them highly suitable for efficient surveys. AKARI has the capability to make pointed observations in addition to the All-Sky Survey, although AKARI is not a fully observatory-type mission in the same guise as the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO; [\cite=ISO]) and the Spitzer Space Telescope ([\cite=SST]), due to the nature of its low-Earth Sun-synchronous orbit.

AKARI has operated normally since the launch, and is now generating large amounts of high-quality data on infrared sources ranging from nearby solar system objects to galaxies at the cosmological distances.

This paper describes the overview of the design, operation and observation of AKARI. Details of the scientific instruments and initial astronomical results based on the data mainly taken in the performance-verification phase (the first month after the opening of the aperture lid) are given in companion papers in this special issue.

AKARI Satellite

The AKARI satellite consists of two main sections, the satellite bus module and the science module as shown in figure [\ref=fig:AKARI_sat]. The science module is a cryostat which contains the telescope and focal-plane instruments. The cryostat with a sun shield is mounted on the bus module through carbon-fiber reinforced plastic (CFRP) trusses, and is thereby thermally isolated from the bus. The satellite bus module includes the subsystems which provide functions such as the power supply, communications, command and data handling, attitude and orbit control, and temperature control and monitoring. The key structure of the bus module is the cylindrical thrust tube (1 m high and 1.2 m diameter) also made of CFRP. The propellant tanks of the reaction control system are stored inside this thrust tube. Subsystems of the bus module are installed on eight instrument panels, and the panels are integrated together around the thrust tube. The lower end of the thrust tube is connected to top of the third stage of the M-V rocket. Two solar paddles are secured around the bus module in the launch configuration, and are deployed in orbit. Major features of AKARI are summarized in table [\ref=tab:first].

Scientific instruments

Cryogenics

A liquid-Helium cryostat of very high efficiency, providing a long cryogenic lifetime with a small amount of liquid Helium, was specifically designed for AKARI ([\cite=Cryo]). This small Helium tank can provide enough room for a large aperture telescope in the cryostat within the weight and volume limits imposed by the launch vehicle. The amount of cryogen is only 179 liters at launch and the expected hold-time of the liquid Helium in orbit is about one and a half years. This high efficiency has been realized by utilizing mechanical cryocoolers and efficient radiative cooling. The cryocoolers on board AKARI are two-stage Stirling-cycle coolers [\citep=narasaki_04]. The outer shell of the cryostat is shaded from the sunlight by the sun-shield, and is cooled down to about 200 K by radiative cooling.

Telescope

The AKARI telescope system is a Ritchey-Chretien type with an effective aperture size of 68.5 cm and an f/6 system ([\cite=Tel_2], [\cite=Tel]). Its focal plane is shared between two infrared instruments and focal-plane star sensors, it has a clear field of view of 38 arcmin in radius. The mirror material is sandwich-type Silicon Carbide (SiC), which consists of a porous SiC core coated with CVD (Chemical Vapor Deposition) SiC. The high stiffness of SiC enables us to make very light-weight mirrors. The primary mirror, which has a physical diameter of 71 cm, weighs only 11 kg.

Focal-plane instruments

One of the focal-plane instruments, FIS [\citep=FIS-Ins], is designed to perform an All-Sky Survey in four far-infrared wavelength bands using Ge:Ga and stressed Ge:Ga detector arrays. This instrument also has a spectroscopic capability via a Fourier transform spectrometer. The other instrument, IRC [\citep=IRC-Ins], consists of three channels, NIR, MIR-S, and MIR-L, which cover the 1.8-5.5 μm, 4.6-13.4 μm, and 12.6-26.5 μm wavelength range, respectively. Each channel has three broad-band filters and additional dispersive elements. the FIS and IRC instruments can be operated simultaneously.

The IRC was originally designed to perform imaging and spectroscopic observations with large-format array detectors, pointing the telescope to a given object. However, the additional acceptable performance of continuous survey-type observations with two rows of the array was confirmed in the ground tests [\citep=ishihara_06], and the All-Sky Survey in S9W and L18W bands were subsequently added to the operation modes.

The wavelength coverage and the spectral resolution of FIS and IRC are shown in figure [\ref=fig:bands], while Figure [\ref=fig:fp] shows the focal-plane layout. A brief summary of AKARI's scientific instruments is given in table [\ref=tab:second]. In addition to the two scientific instruments, AKARI is also equipped with focal-plane star sensors (referred to as FSTS-S and FSTS-L), which are used to determine the telescope boresight during the All-Sky Survey.

Satellite operations

AKARI was initially launched into an elliptical orbit by the M-V rocket. The reaction control system then drove up the perigee altitude to bring the satellite to the observing orbit, a circular Sun-synchronous polar orbit at an altitude of approximately 700 km and inclination of 98.2 deg. AKARI flies along the day-night border with an orbital period of approximately 100 min. This orbit is similar to that of the previous IRAS satellite, and is the most suitable orbit for scanning the sky while keeping the telescope direction away from the Sun and the Earth whose strong emission would be ruinous for the cooled telescope.

Just after the launch, it was found that the Sun aspect sensors could not detect the Sun properly. The cause of this problem is still unknown to date. This problem forced us to rewrite the on-board software for the attitude and orbit control subsystem, and delayed the opening of the aperture lid by a month. The aperture lid was finally opened on 2006 April 13, after which AKARI began to observe the sky. In the performance-verification phase, one month after the aperture lid opening, tuning of the scientific instruments and the attitude and orbit control subsystem, and telescope focus adjustment were performed. AKARI started the all-Sky Survey on 2006 May 8. Major events in the AKARI operation timeline are summarized in table [\ref=tab:third].

The attitude of AKARI observations are controlled as follows: during the All-Sky Survey, the spacecraft rotates around the axis directed toward the Sun once every orbital revolution, avoiding the Earth. This results in a continuous scan of the sky at a scan speed of 3.6 arcmin/s (figure [\ref=fig:scan]). The whole sky can in principle be covered in half a year. The FIS and the IRC are also operated in a pointing mode, where the instruments observe a certain sky position for a longer exposure (approximately 10 minutes for one pointing with a maneuvering time of 20 minutes).

The attitude control system provides additional capabilities to shift the pointing direction by small amounts during the pointed observations, i.e. micro and slow scans. In the micro scan, the pointing direction is shifted by less than 30 arcsec for the purpose of dithering the IRC images. The slow scan is a continuous scan at a much slower scan speed (4-30 arcsec/s) compared to the All-Sky Survey. This is used to obtain sky images to significantly higher sensitivities than the All-Sky Survey.

The communications subsystem provides the command uplink in the S band, and telemetry downlink in the S and X bands. The commands are uplinked from the JAXA Uchinoura Space Center. The telemetry data are stored in the onboard data recorder which has a 2 GB memory, and then transmitted to the ground. The S-band telemetry normally includes low-rate engineering housekeeping data, while the high-rate (4 Mbps) X-band telemetry is used for scientific data transmission. The telemetry data are received at Uchinoura station, ESA's Kiruna station and also the KSAT Svalbard station. The AKARI data amounts to approximately 2 GB per day.

In-orbit performance

The scientific instruments are all operating normally in orbit. The temperature of the telescope and the IRC structure is 5.8 K, and the temperature of the FIS detectors and the structure is 2 K or lower. Measurements of the Helium content performed in orbit has shown that the expected hold-time of the liquid Helium in orbit is longer than 500 days [\citep=Cryo], which means that the All-Sky Survey can be executed more than twice within the cryogen lifetime. The telescope has a diffraction-limited performance for wavelengths longer than 7.3 μm [\citep=Tel]. The telescope pointing error is less than 3 arcsec. The attitude stability in the pointing mode is approximately 1 arcsec, and the rate stability in the All-Sky Survey is less than 10- 4 deg/s. These numbers meet the scientific specifications for the requirements of the mission.

The point-source flux detection limits at S/N >   5 for one scan in the All-Sky Survey are 0.05, 0.13, 2.4, 0.55, 1.4, and 6.3 Jy for S9W, L18W, N60, Wide-S, Wide-L, and N160 bands, respectively. These were estimated on the basis of the noise measured in orbit using the preliminary version of the pipeline software and could be improved with upgraded data reduction techniques. The chief advantage of the AKARI survey over the IRAS survey will be the wide spectral coverage and the higher spatial resolution. The detection limits in the two mid-infrared bands are much better than those of IRAS. In the far-infrared bands, the higher spatial resolution of AKARI is expected to improve source detection and flux estimations significantly particularly in confused regions [\citep=jeong].

More details on the in-orbit performance of the focal-plane instruments are described by [\citet=FIS-Ins], [\citet=IRC-Ins], and [\citet=ohyama_07].

Observation strategy

The AKARI observations are classified into three categories, Large-Area Surveys ([\cite=LS], [\cite=NEP]), Mission Programs (MP), and Open-Time programs (OT). The Large-Area Survey of central importance is of course the All-Sky Survey. The field of view is 8 arcmin for the FIS and 10 arcmin for the IRC. Successive sky scans cover the same sky area at least twice, and enable efficient confirmation of the detection of celestial sources excluding false signals due to cosmic ray hits and sources of noise. The achieved sky coverage is greater than 90 % of the whole sky during the first year, although some areas are left unobserved or observed only once due to the Moon interference and disturbance by charged particles in the South Atlantic anomaly.

In addition to the All-Sky Survey, we are also conducting two further Large-Area Survey programs, consisting of a survey of the North Ecliptic Pole region (NEP) and the Large Magellanic Cloud. These two regions are covered with the pointed observations. Both are located at high ecliptic latitudes, where the density of scan paths for the All-Sky Survey is high and thus some observing time can be spared for pointed observations. Approximately 25 % of the total available pointed observations for AKARI are for use in the Large-Area Survey programs.

The Mission Programs are organized to interweave a series of pointed observations. Fifteen programs on solar-system objects, star-forming regions, stars, interstellar matter, infrared galaxies and cosmology are being executed. About 45 % of the total pointed observations for AKARI are assigned to the Mission Programs.

In addition to the above observation programs, 30 % of the pointed observations in Phase 2 (see below) of the mission are opened to the Japanese, Korean, and European astronomical community.

Lastly, some pointed-observation opportunities are reserved for the calibration of instruments and Directors discretionary observations.

The observation periods are separated into three phases. The Phase 1 observations were made in the first six months after the performance-verification phase. AKARI performed the first All-Sky Survey during this phase and also some pointed observations at high ecliptic latitudes. The actual period of Phase 1 began on 2006 May 8 and ended six months later on 2006 November 9. Approximately 70 % of the sky has been covered with two or more scans in this period. In addition, a part of the Large-Area Surveys in the North Ecliptic Pole region and the Large Magellanic Cloud, were also executed. The Phase 2 period began on 2006 November 10, and will last until all the Helium is exhausted. The second All-Sky Survey to increase the sky coverage, and the pointed observations for the Mission Programs are being executed during this phase. The Phase 3 observations are defined as those after the Helium is exhausted. In Phase 3, only pointed observations using the IRC/NIR channel are possible.

The point source catalogues of the All-Sky Survey are planned for release to the astronomical community in a timely fashion after the end of the survey.

Summary

The AKARI mission is operating normally and has been generating 2 GB of data every day since May 2006. Its All-Sky Survey will provide new infrared source catalogs which are expected to surpass the IRAS catalogs with higher spatial resolutions and wider spectral coverage. The AKARI mission will provide an important and valuable database for the present and future research in galaxy evolution, star formation, and planet formation.

Acknowledgements

The AKARI project, formerly known as ASTRO-F, is managed and operated by the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), with the participation of universities and research institutes in Japan, the European Space Agency (ESA), the IOSG (Imperial College, UK, Open University, UK, University of Sussex, UK, and University of Groningen, Netherlands) Consortium, and Seoul National University, Korea. The FIS instrument is developed by Nagoya University, ISAS/JAXA, the University of Tokyo, and the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan and other institutes, with contributions of NICT to the development of the detectors. The IRC instrument is developed by ISAS/JAXA and the University of Tokyo and other supporting institutes. ESA/ESAC provides support for the All-Sky Survey data processing, through the pointing reconstruction. ESAC also provides user support for the observing opportunities distributed to European astronomers. ESA/ESOC is providing the mission with ground support through its ground station in Kiruna.

We owe the success of AKARI to the dedication of many people. Especially, researchers of the engineering section of ISAS/JAXA have very much contributed to the development of the AKARI satellite system. Here we list their names to express our gratitude: M. Hashimoto, T. Hashimoto, H. Hatta, E. Hirokawa, K. Hirose, K. Hori, T. Ichikawa, T. Ikenaga, Y. Inatani, K. Inoue, N. Ishii, T. Kato, Y. Kawakatsu, J. Kawaguchi, Y. Matogawa, K. Minesugi, H. Nakabe, T. Nakajima, I. Nakatani, M.C. Natori, H. Ogawa N. Okuizumi, J. Onoda, E. Sato, H. Saito, H. Saito, S. Sawai, M. Shida, Y. Sone, M. Tajima, T. Toda, K.T. Uesugi, T. Yamada, H. Yamakawa. Z. Yamamoto, and M. Yoshikawa.

We also would like to thank the M-V rocket team led by Y. Morita for successfully launching the spacecraft into orbit.

Finally, we would like to thank the Science Advisory Committee of AKARI (N. Arimoto, T. Hasegawa, T. Mukai, Y. Nakada, S. Okamura, M. Tamura, and Y. Taniguchi) for their valuable guide to maximize the scientific outputs from AKARI.