An immediate proofof the non-existence of GW's

1. - As it is well known, the notion of GW came forth as a by-product of the linear approximation of GR [\cite=1]. Now, this approximation - which resembles Maxwell e.m. theory - is fully inadequate to a proper study of the hypothetic GW's (see [\cite=2], [\cite=3]). On the other hand, in the exact (non-approximate) formulation of GR no "mechanism" exists in reality for the physical generation of the GW's, as it can be proved [\cite=3]. The undulatory solutions of Einstein field equations have a mere formal character.

I give here another proof of the real non-existence of physical GW's, which is so straightforward that even the physicist in the street will understand it.

2. - There is a radical difference between Maxwell e.m. theory and Einstein general relativity: Maxwell theory is Lorentz invariant, the set of the inertial observers is physically privileged - Einstein theory has an invariant character with respect to all transformations of general co-ordinates, and no observer is physically privileged [\cite=4]. All observers are on an equal physical footing just like the inertial observers in Maxwell theory. (Strictly speaking, in GR the concept "observer" requires a particular specification [\cite=5]).

3. - An electric charge C which is at rest for a given inertial observer I0 cannot emit e.m. waves. Any inertial observer I for whom C is in motion does not possess physical privileges with respect to I0. Accordingly, both observer I0 and observer I do not register any e.m. wave sent forth by C.

In GR the expression at rest must be defined precisely every time, specifying the interested spacetime manifold, because the co-ordinates are mere "labels" of point events [\cite=5]. Let us consider for instance the Einsteinian gravitational field generated by a homogeneous sphere of an incompressible fluid as it was investigated by Schwarzschild [\cite=6]. In Schwarzschild's system of co-ordinates S0 the sphere is at rest, and no GW is emitted. Now, any observer S - very far, in particular, from observer S0 -, for whom the sphere of fluid is in motion does not possess any physical privilege with respect to S0. Accordingly, both observer S0 and observer S do not register any GW sent forth by the sphere of fluid. It is evident that this argument can be extended to any celestial body B, which can be considered at rest for a given observer S0 and in motion for any observer S, who is very far, in particular, from S0. Q.e.d. -

APPENDIX

α) I have repeatedly emphasized in my papers that the notion of GW was originally (1916-1918) a by-product of the linearized version of the exact (nonlinear) formulation of GR. This circumstance has unduly influenced almost all the subsequent researches (both theoretical and experimental) concerning the GW's. The great majority of the physicists have considered their existence as an obvious fact, not deserving the proof given by a real existence theorem. Even today the overwhelming majority of the experimentalists know only Einstein's old papers [\cite=1]. The superficial (and false) analogy with Maxwell e.m. theory has generated ruinous consequences. Thus, since forty years the GW hunters persist in their vain efforts aimed at the experimental detection of GW's. In the last years the inconclusive conclusions of their papers have assumed a pathetic character of the following kind: - No gravitational wave was observed; however, the search provided us with an encouraging upper limit on the gravity wave strain at our apparatuses. -

β) I reproduce here the abstract and the third paragraph of the Introduction of a recent paper by S.D. Mohanty, Sz. Márka, et alii, entitled "Search algorithm for a gravitational wave signal in association with Gamma Ray Burst GRB030329 using the LIGO detectors" [\cite=7]. The abstract is as follows: "One of the brightest Gamma Ray Burst ever recorded, GRB030329, occurred

[formula]

analyzed for the presence of a gravitational wave signal associated with this GRB. This paper presents a detailed description of the search algorithm implemented in the current analysis." And the third paragraph of the Introduction tells us that: "The search algorithm is the component which acts on pre-processed data and produces a list of candidate events or the value of a statistics which is then used in drawing a statistical inference. A first version of a full analysis pipeline was reported in Mohanty S.D. et al. 2004 Class. Quantum Grav. 21 S765-S774 and the pipeline used for the present analysis will be described in LIGO Science Collaboration: Abbott B. et al. 2004 To be submitted."

Now, a report on INTERNET (13 January 2004) by the second author of the above paper (Sz. Márka) has informed us that "We did not observe a gravity burst, which can be associated with GRB030329." Any comment is superfluous. -

[formula]