=

1.25in .125in .25in

The Light Curve Variations of The Active Binaries With Hot Subdwarf Component

Introduction

Nowadays, there are few systems containing a hot subdwarf and a cool giant component. The observations of these systems are very important for the evolution of the hot subdwarf, studying the activity of cool giant stars and also for testing the evolution models. Hot subdwarf stars are the helium burning stars (the mass of He core is about 0.5 solar masses) covered with a very thin hydrogen shell (about 0.02 solar masses). They form a relatively narrow sequence at the blue end of the horizontal branch (HB). Therefore they are referred to as Extended Horizontal Branch Stars (EHB). The major difference to normal HB stars is the fact that they do not evolve to the asymptotic giant branch. Many of them are members of binary systems with late-type components. The secondary components which we observed are cool (G8 or K0 III-IV) and shows solar-like activity. We give some results of the photometric studies of V1379 Aql and FF Aqr. The observations of the systems were carried out with the 48 cm Cassegrain telescope at Ege University Observatory in 2003 year.

The Light Curve Variations

V1379 Aql is a binary system containing a red giant (K0 III/IV) and a hot subdwarf B star. The first indication of chromospheric activity on the giant star came from the detection of Ca II H & K emission by Bidelman & MacConnell (1973). Photometric variations with an amplitude of about 0m.2 were first observed by Henry et al. (1982). The system is asynchronous, the rotational period of 25.4 days found by Balona et al. (1987) being longer than the orbital period (20.7 days) determined from radial velocity measurements (Balona 1987, Fekel et al. 1993). Hooten & Hall (1990) determined a photometric period of about 26 days with a variation amplitude of 0m.20-0m.25 in the V band. In this study, the photometric period of the system was found 25.7 days with an amplitude of 0m.13 in the V band. This might suggest that the photometric period of the system is changing. Also, the amplitude of the light in V band is different from another data which are given previous years.

FF Aqr is an eclipsing binary containing a hot subdwarf OB star and a chromospherically active companion as G8 III star. The light curve which obtained by Dworetsky et al. (1977) in 1975 displays an asymmetrical wave distortion outside of the eclipse with the maximum at about 0P.55 and an amplitude of 0m.35 in V band. Dorren et al. (1983) observed the system in the b, v, y Strömgren bands. The observations show that the wave maximum had moved to phase 0P.72. Marilli et al. (1995) presented the photometry of the system. In this study, the maximum of the wave distortion outside of the eclipse was found to occur at about 0P.5 with an amplitude of 0m.12. The light curve of the system in V band was found to be changed when it was compared with another light curves given by Dworetsky et al. (1977), Dorren et al. (1983) and Marilli et al. (1995). The maximum of the wave outside of the eclipse occurred at different phases. This is indicative of the spotted star surface.

Conclusion

The shape of the chromospherically active stars' light curves depends on the parameters of active regions such as cool spot or spot groups. It varies with time depending on the location (latitude and longitude), numbers, relative sizes and relative temperatures of the active regions with respect to the unspotted photosphere, life-times and the orientation of the rotation axis. Any change in some of these variables in short or long time interval will affect the shape and the amplitude of the light curve with time. Long-term continuous monitoring of a spotted star covering at least ten years may reveal better understanding of the behavior of surface inhomogeneities, i.e. activity cycles, migration of the active regions, changes of the photometric periods and surface differential rotation. The Sun's differential rotation has been known for a long time by interpreting location of the sunspots. At present we know from the butterfly diagram that the active regions to formation at the middle latitudes at the beginning of the 11-year activity cycle and the activity get stronger with increasing spot numbers. When the active regions appear close to the equator the activity decreases and the cycle is ending. The present technique is inadequate to resolve stellar disks. Therefore we could reveal surface differential rotation from the migration of starspots. In other words, presence of surface differential rotation in the stars can be inferred from changes in rotational period (Hall 1991).

Acknowledgements

This work has been partly supported by the Research Foundation of Ege University with the project number 2003/FEN/003.