Chromo-thermal oscillations and collapse of strange stars to black holes : Astrophysical Implications

1 Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Homi Bhaba Road, Colaba, Mumbai 400 005, India. 2 Dept. of Physics, Presidency College, 86/1 , College Street,Kolkata 700 073, India. 3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Calgary, Canada AB T2N 1N4. 4 Department of Physics, Purdue University, 525 Northwestern Avenue West Lafayette, IN 47907-2036, USA. 5 Inter University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411 007, India. *   Ramanna Research Fellow, Govt. of India. [formula] CSIR emeritus Scientist, Govt. of India.

Introduction

The concept of Strange Star (SS) is not a new one. Itoh (1970) first proposed a model for it even when the QCD theory did not reach its current status. During this period Bodmer (1971) discussed about an astrophysical object collapsed from its usual state formed by nucleonic matter. He argued that Collapsed Nuclei have radii much smaller than ordinary nuclei. Then Witten (1984) suggested that the early universe may have undergone a first order phase transition from high temperature dense quark phase to low temperature dilute baryonic phase, both the phases being stable with local minima. The low temperature phase grow and gradually occupy more than half of the volume. At this point the high temperature regions detach from each other into isolated bubbles. Then further expansion of the universe results in cooling in low temperature phase. These bubbles may survive till today in the form of strange stars. He also conjectured that the true ground state of matter is " Strange Quark Matter (SQM)", not Fe56. SQM is a bulk quark matter phase consisting of roughly equal numbers of up, down and strange quarks plus a small number of electrons to guarantee charge neutrality. SQM would then have a lower energy per baryon than ordinary nuclei and manifests in the form of strange stars. But the SS hypothesis is not till beyond skepticism. The maximum mass-radius obtained in SS models are usually lower than that obtained from neutron star (NS) models. So SS models face difficulties in explaining the high mass stars like PSR J0751+1807 (Nice et al., 2005) and EXO 0748-676 (Ozel, 2006) which have masses [formula]. Even only a very few stiff neutron matter Equations of State (EsoS) can explain the estimated mass-radius of EXO 0748-676 (Ozel, 2006) . On the other hand, there are some observational features which are easier to explain with SS model rather than NS model. As examples, harmonic absorption lines in the X-ray spectrum of compact stars like 1E 1207.4-  5209, J1210-  5226, RX J1856.-  3754 etc, can be explained as the consequences of compressional modes of surface vibrations of SS (Sinha et ~ al 2003). SS can produce such oscillations since they have sharp surfaces and are self bound with zero pressure at the surface, where energy per baryon (E/A) is minimum and the density is non-zero. Such harmonic compressional modes are not possible for a neutron star because of the lack of minimum in E/A. Another observed feature, superburst, faces difficulties in using the standard carbon burning scenario within neutron star models. Sinha et ~ al. (2002) proposed an alternative scenario as the formation of diquark pairs on the strange star surface and their subsequent breaking - giving a continuous and prolonged emission of energy comparable with that emitted during the superbursts.

So we are supporting the view that both SS and NS exists in nature and under suitable physical condition an NS may convert to an SS leading to energy outburst (Bombaci et ~ al. 2004, Staff et ~ al. 2007). But further study is needed to pinpoint the condition which will give rise to such a transition.

With this view, we feel it is intriguing to study the properties of SS by matching theoretical predictions (of mass, radius etc.) with astronomical observations. One such property is the temperature dependence of the mass and the radius of an SS as it cools (by neutrino or photon emission) or heats up (by accreting matter). In this paper, the effect of temperature on SQM EoS is studied. We show that an increase in temperature leads to a softening of the SQM EoS giving rise to a decrease in maximum mass of the SS. When the temperature drops, the EoS stiffens again. We show that this leads to chromo-thermal instability which has interesting implications in astrophysics.

There are several EoSs for SQM, such as the Bag model (Alcock et ~ al. 1986, Haensel et ~ al. 1986, Kettner et ~ al. 1995), the perturbative quantum chromodynamics (QCD) model (Fraga et ~ al. 2001), the chiral chromodielectric model (Malheiro et ~ al. 2003) etc. However, in all these models, the effect of finite temperature was not sufficiently studied. Such study has been performed in the present work using the relativistic mean field model (Dey et ~ al 1998, Bagchi et ~ al. 2006) for SQM. The other novelty in this model is that here chiral symmetry is restored at high densities due to the introduction of a density dependence of quark masses. The paper is organized as follows: our model for SS is briefly discussed in § [\ref=sec:model] and § [\ref=sec:sstobh] is devoted to the study of SS properties at finite temperatures including the chromo-thermal instability and possible collapse of an SS to a black hole. In § [\ref=sec:appl], we have discussed the relevance of our results in the astrophysics of core collapse supernovae and gamma ray bursts (GRBs). We conclude in § [\ref=sec:conclude] with a suggestion on how these oscillations can be observed.

The mean field model for strange stars

Strange stars are more compact than neutron stars and fit into the Bodmer-  Witten hypothesis for the existence of SQM. In the relativistic Hartree-Fock calculation for the SQM EoS, Dey et ~ al. (1998) used a phenomenological inter-quark interaction, namely the Richardson potential (Richardson, 1979). This potential takes care of two features of the inter-quark force, namely asymptotic freedom (AF) and confinement with the same scale, which is not true from theoretical considerations.

Later, SS properties have been calculated with a modified Richardson potential having different scales for AF and confinement. The scale values were obtained from baryon magnetic moment calculations (Bagchi et ~ al. 2004). In this model, chiral symmetry restoration at high density is incorporated by introducing density dependent quark masses. A temperature dependence of gluon mass is considered in addition to its usual density dependence. The gluon mass represents the medium effect, resulting in the screening of the inter-quark interaction. The temperature effect through the Fermi function is also incorporated and at non-zero temperature, free energy F = E - TS is used instead of energy E while calculating the EoS. It is also ensured that in SQM, the chemical potentials of the quarks satisfy β equilibrium and charge neutrality conditions. The parameters of the model are adjusted in such a way that the minimum value of E / A for u,d,s quark matter is less than that of Fe56, so that u,d,s quark matter can constitute stable stars. The minimum value of E / A is obtained at the star surface where the pressure is zero. However, the minimum value of E / A for u,d quark matter is greater than that of Fe56 so that Fe56 remains the most stable element in the non-strange world. With the obtained EsoS, Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkov equations for hydrostatic equilibrium are solved to get the structures of the stars at different temperatures (Bagchi et ~ al. 2006).

Temperature effect on strange star properties

The increase of temperature softens the SQM EoS (i.e ~ p ~  =  ~ p(ε), where p is the pressure and ε is the energy density - see Fig.[\ref=fig:ss]a) resulting in a different curve in the mass-radius plane with a lower value of maximum mass (Fig. [\ref=fig:ss]b). The figures also reveal the fact that if an EoS is stiffer than another at a given temperature, then it will remain stiffer even at a different temperature. Here we have used the stiffest (EoS A) and the softest (EoS F) EoSs in our model (Bagchi et ~ al. 2006). The change in EoS is due to a combined effect of the change of gluon mass and the quark distribution function (Fermi function) with temperature, which also changes the number densities (n) of the quarks. Both the energy density and number density increases with temperature. But the increase in energy density is more dominant than that in number density (see Bagchi et ~ al. 2006 for expressions of ε and n) . So energy per baryon increases with rising temperature - resulting in an increase of mass of the star for a fixed baryon number. We find a softening of the EoS at a higher temperature, in contrast to other models showing the opposite behavior (Kettner et ~ al. 1995). Moreover, all models consider the effect of temperature through Fermi function but in addition to this, our model incorporates the temperature dependence of the interquark interaction.

In our model, while establishing beta equilibrium conditions, we have assumed that neutrinos have escaped from the star. This is true in the low temperature regime. But at high temperatures like 50-80 MeV, some of the neutrinos will be trapped inside the star which will affect the EoS. But here for simplicity, we neglect this effect as our concern is the astrophysical processes in moderately low temperature where this assumption is valid.

To illustrate the effect of temperature on the behavior of SS, we choose the softest EoS (F). Fig. [\ref=fig:ssbh1]a shows mass - radius curves at different temperatures for this EoS. We also found that for a fixed total baryon number, a higher temperature corresponds to a higher mass of the star implying that the effective masses of the constituent particles are greater at higher temperatures. On the other hand, for a fixed total baryon number, a higher temperature corresponds to a smaller radius of the star implying that the constituent particles are closer to each other i.e. the number density is higher.

Another interesting property shown in (Fig. [\ref=fig:ssbh1]a) is the decrease of the maximum mass of strange stars with the increase of temperature which can be fitted as :

[formula]

where [formula] is the maximum mass (in the unit of solar mass), TMeV is the temperature of the star in units of MeV and [formula] is the maximum mass at a temperature of 0 MeV and a is a parameter. As an example, EOS F gives [formula] = 1.4485 and a ~  =  ~ 0.0047 . The fit quality is good as depicted in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssbh1]b where the solid line represents the fit and the "+  "s indicate maximum masses at different temperatures.

The maximum mass point in a given M-R curve also corresponds to maximum baryon number. We find that the baryon number of a maximum mass star at a certain temperature is greater than that of a maximum mass stars at higher temperatures (Table [\ref=tb:maxmass]). So an SS sitting at the maximum mass point needs to decrease its baryon number in order to increase its temperature. The implausibility of this phenomenon implies that this star can only cool. If it accrets matter which generate heat (e.g. Ouyed et ~ al. 2005), then it must collapse to a black hole. However, an SS does not necessarily have the maximum mass, rather it can have any mass less than the maximum mass. Such an SS can be heated by accretion and can lead to oscillations in the star's mass and radius, what we refer to below as the chromo-thermal oscillations.

Chromo-thermal oscillations and collapse to a black hole

Now let us discuss the chromo-thermal instability. Initially, the strange star was at a low temperature (the reason for this will be discussed in section 4.1) around 0-10 MeV. At such a low temperature, all the neutrinos escape from the star. Then if there is hyper-accretion onto such a low temperature SS, the star will be heated  20-30 MeV. As this temperature is not too high, there will not be generation of neutrinos in copious amount to affect the EoS. There will be emission of gamma-ray fireball from the hot star which will halt the accretion. During this period the star cools. Then the process repeats. Here we can take the baryon number of the star to be constant for few accretion episodes as the strange quark matter is much more dense than the normal accreting matter.

Let us first consider the case where heating and cooling are not simultaneous (as mentioned just above) but equal in magnitude. In this case, as the star heats up during an accretion event, it will move from one M-R curve at a lower temperature to another at a higher temperature following an iso-baryon line in such a way that the mass of the star increases and the radius decreases as depicted in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssbh2] which shows different probable paths or iso-baryon lines (dashed lines) corresponding to different initial masses and temperatures of the star. Then cooling starts and the star will move to lower temperature M-R curve through the same iso-baryon line and its mass will decrease and radius will increase. Since the timescales of these phenomena are set by quark interactions, the adjustment of the star's mass and radius is to a first approximation of the same order as the signal crossing time of the star or, R / cs  ~  0.04 ms, where cs is the speed of sound in SQM (for an estimate of cs see Sinha et ~ al. 2004) i.e. the changes in star's mass and radius are almost instantaneous. In the case of continuous accretion, these processes will repeat making the star oscillate along an iso-baryon line between two M-R curves, one at a higher temperature and the other at a lower temperature. This subsequent increase and decrease in the radius is the oscillation driven by the chromo-thermal instability discovered in the present work. After a sufficiently long time of accretion, the oscillation will move to another iso-baryon line representing a higher baryon number.

The nature of these oscillations is different from the well known "radial oscillation" arising due to perturbations in the hydrostatic equilibrium at a constant temperature (Chandrasekhar 1964). There are two fundamental differences between these oscillations and chromo-thermal oscillation. First, in the oscillations a la "Chandrasekhar" the mass of the star remains constant and secondly the radial oscillations are very small in magnitude. In our case, both the mass and radius oscillate and up to 10% change in radius and mass are possible.

For illustration purpose, let us take the softest EoS F, stiffer EsoS will give higher values of masses than quoted below. With this EoS, let us consider a strange star with initial mass [formula] and initial temperature 10 MeV with total baryon number NB,1.0,10 = 1.36677  ×  1057 (point (i) in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssbh2]) as an example. When it is heated to a temperature of 30 MeV, it will come to a point where the mass is [formula] (ii in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssbh2]) which has the same baryon number. During this phase the star's radius would have instantaneously decreased by ~  4% and the gravitational mass increased by ~  10%. Then cooling starts and the star will return to point (i). If accretion is still occurring, the process starts again continues until the baryon number increases significantly at which point the star finds itself on another iso-baryon line. These large oscillations in radius and mass, we expect, could have unique observational signatures (see section [\ref=sec:conclude]).

This oscillation will affect observational features in different ways - the gravitational redshift z increases by 22% when a star comes from point (i) to point (ii) of the above example. Moreover, the sudden changes in the star's radius and mass may alter the properties of the star, such as its Schwarzschild radius and its innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO), in such a way that it might affect the accretion process and lead to disc instabilities which may be observed by observing processes related to accretion.

We have also calculated the amount of energy needed for such oscillations to occur. During each half oscillation, the energy input to the star (during heating) or the energy emission from the star (during cooling) is equal to the change in its free energy (ΔF). For the above example of oscillation between point (i) and point (ii),

[formula]

where S1 and S2 are total entropy of the star at points (i) and (ii). The entropy density s(r) is estimated during calculation of the EsoS (Eqn. 8 of Bagchi et ~ al 2006). s(r) in in the unit of fm- 3 and the unitless total entropy S is obtained by integrating s(r). We found S1 = 9.736  ×  1056 and S2 = 29.3711  ×  1056. The amount of accretion needed during heating is determined by ηMaccr  =  ΔF where η is the efficiency for the accreting matter to give energy to the star (as some of the energy from the accreting matter will be emitted in the form of x-rays and so on). The exact value of η is not known, but we are assuming that only a small portion of the energy of the accreting matter will dissipate and so taking η ~  = 0.8, we get [formula] needed to bring the star from point (i) to point (ii). During cooling, i.e. when the star comes from point (ii) to point (i), ΔF = 0.03273  ×  1060MeV energy will be emitted by the energetic photons. As [formula] normal matter contains 0.0366625  ×  1.116  ×  1060 / 939 ~  =  ~ 0.04357  ×  1057 baryons, so after two or three cycles, the star will start to oscillate along the next higher iso-baryon line. As the initial baryon number of the star was 1.36678  ×  1057 and the maximum baryon number at 30 MeV is 1.64  ×  1057, after (1.64 - 1.36678) / 0.04357  ~  6 oscillations the star will collapse to a black hole. This is an example of an extreme case. It is more probable that the accretion rate is lower and the star is oscillating for a long time between two close temperatures say 10 ~ MeV and 12 ~ MeV. In that case the change in M and R will be very small, difficult to detect; but the effect of this breathing process is till possible to detect by observing other properties of the star which are affected by these oscillations - like gravitational redshift, disk properties, etc.

A more complex oscillatory behavior will result in situations where heating and cooling rates (i.e. timescales) are not equal.

The feedback mechanism between heating/cooling (the external drive) and the star's response through the chromothermal oscillations, and the consequences for the star properties and the underlying accretion process are being currently explored in more details.

The collapse to a black hole occurs when the star reaches such a high temperature that the maximum baryon number at that temperature is less than the baryon number of the star. As an example, if an SS has initial mass [formula] at 0 MeV (with baryon number NB,1.3,0 ~  =  ~ 19.24  ×  1056), it will remain an SS when heated to 10 MeV (NB,max,10 ~  = 20.00  ×  1056  >  NB,1.3,0) but will collapse to a black hole before reaching 30 MeV (as NB,max,30 ~  =  ~ 16.40  ×  1056  <  NB,1.3,0). The lower the initial mass of the strange star, the higher the temperature it can sustain.

Throughout the work, we have assumed that the stars are isothermal even at higher temperatures. Random motions of quarks at very high velocities (0.5-0.7) as quoted in Bagchi et ~ al. 2007 will facilitate isothermal configurations. For theoretical interest, we will discuss isentropic configurations in section [\ref=sec:isentropy].

Isentropic configurations

Till now, we have considered the strange stars to be isothermal. On the other hand, extensive study of neutron star evolution shows that after few seconds from its birth, a neutron star will come to an isentropic configuration (Fig. 2 of Burrows & Lattimer, 1986). Though we have not performed such a study of strange star evolution, for the sake of completeness, here we are representing the results for isentropic configurations.

We have calculated EoSs for isentropic SQM with two chosen values of entropy per baryon (S / nB) e.g. 1.8 and 1.2 with the set of parameters used to get EoS F in Bagchi et. ~ al (2006). For both the cases, temperature T increases with increasing nB / n0, and for a fixed value of nB / n0, T is higer for a higher S / nB as shown in the upper panel (panel "a") of Fig [\ref=fig:isentropy].

The EoS becomes softer with increase of S / nB giving lower value of maximum mass. Table [\ref=tb:maxmass_isentropy] shows different parameters of maximum mass stars for these two values of S / nB. As usual, maximum mass star contains maximum total baryon number. The lower panel (panel "b") of Fig [\ref=fig:isentropy] shows mass-radius curves with these two values of S / nB.

The figure in panel "a" can be interpreted as the variation of temperature from surface to center as we found that for both values of S / nB, the value of nB / n0 at the surface is [formula] and at the center it is [formula] for a maximum mass star. So we can say, for a maximum mass star, T varies from 34 Mev to 23 Mev from center to surface for S / nB  =  1.8 and T varies from 23 MeV to 15 Mev from center to surface for S / nB  =  1.2. These values are not too different from what Pons et. ~ al obtained for proto-neutron stars (Fig 3 of Pons et. ~ al, 1999).

It is clear from table [\ref=tb:maxmass_isentropy] that a maximum mass strange star can collapse to a black hole if it is heated by accretion i.e. ~ S / nB increases as the maximum baryon number allowed for a higher S / nB is less than the baryon number for a maximum mass star at a lower value of S / nB.

Chromothermal oscillations along any iso-baryon line can occur here also if initially a strange star has its mass less than the maximum mass. The figure in panel "b" shows two such examples, oscillation can occur between points (i)-(ii) and (iii)-(iv). When a star comes from point (i) having mass [formula] and radius 6.386 km to point (ii) having mass [formula] and radius 6.274 km by changing S / nB value from 1.2 to 1.8 and keeping its total baryon number fixed at 1.318  ×  1057, its mass increases by an amount of 3.88% and radius decreases by an amount of 1.82%, similarly when the star comes from point (iii) having mass [formula] and radius 6.036 km to point (iv) having mass [formula] and radius 5.96 km by changing S / nB value from 1.2 to 1.8 and keeping its total baryon number fixed at 1.026  ×  1057, then its mass increases by an amount of 6.46% and radius decreases by an amount of 1.26%. The change in free energy (see eqn [\ref=eq:free_energy]) is [formula] for a transition (i) - (ii), and it is [formula] for a transition (iii) - (iv). These values are equal to the amount of accretion needed when the star is being heated and comes from a lower S / nB curve to a higher S / nB curve i.e. transition from point (i) to (ii) or (iii) to (iv). Alternatively, these are the amount of energy emitted by the stars during cooling i.e. transition from a higher S / nB curve to a lower S / nB curve - like from point (ii) to (i) or from point (iv) to (iii).

Astrophysical Implications

Core collapse supernova

In a core collapse supernova, people guess the possibility of production of either a neutron star or a strange star or a black hole. We model that first a neutron star is born during the supernova, which rapidly comes to a low temperature by neutrino cooling and then it converts to a strange star (e.g. Staff et ~ al. 2006). The intermediate neutron star stage may lead to a delay between a supernova and the subsequent strange star formation which has interesting implications to the model of GRBs involving strange stars (Staff et ~ al. 2007).

Here we should remember that our EsoS for SQM, which ignore neutrino effects, might not be appropriate at a very high temperature created by the supernova. But as we are modeling that first a neutron star is born during the supernova and then it converts to a strange star at a low temperature, the simplification in the EoS does not affect the physics.

Gamma ray bursts

The recent launch of Swift satellite has revealed some new interesting features of the GRB afterglows which can not be easily explained by current models. If a strange star form inside a collapsar then a new model involving a three step process in the framework of the "Quark Nova" scenario (Ouyed et ~ al. 2002; Keränen et ~ al. 2005) is one possible way of explaining recent swift data. In this model, the conversion of a neutron star to a strange star followed later by the conversion of the strange star to a black hole - as suggested in this paper - is involved. Here GRB occurs due to the jet from the accreting strange star (Ouyed et ~ al. 2005). Depending on the initial mass, temperature and the accretion rate, a strange star may collapse to a black hole and the accretion onto the black hole gives rise to an ultra-relativistic jet causing the giant flares observed in some GRB afterglows (see Staff et ~ al. 2007 for details).

conclusion

In this paper we studied the effects of temperature on the EoS of SQM. A novelty in our model is the increase of the softness of the EoS at high temperatures. This feature reveals the dependence of the maximum allowable mass on the temperature and the change of the star's mass and radius with temperature. This suggests that the collapse of an SS to black hole is more intricate than previously thought and might have interesting astrophysical applications specifically in situations involving accreting SS with applications to GRBs.

We have also isolated a new type of radial oscillations that we termed chromo-thermal. As the increase in mass is accompanied by the decrease in radius and vice versa, the value of gravitational redshift z will also oscillate. This effect could in principle be detected through spectral or timing analysis techniques and should put our model to test.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank P. Jaikumar, W. Dobler, N. Wityk and B. Niebergal for useful comments. This research was partly supported by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India.