Sex and hermaphroditism in the Penna model Lecture "Computer Simulation": D.Stauffer

Comparing sex and hermaphroditism

I compared sexual(SX) and hermaphroditic(HA) reproduction schemes within the Penna model

[formula]

. I also reproduced the results for a self-emerging dominance

[formula]

gave strong argument, that from two species competing for the same resources the one with a higher stable population while not competing will prevail, while the other one will die out.

The parameters were: Birthrate B = 4, minimum reproduction age R = 8, mutational threshold T = 3, and mutation rate M = 1. Different values for Nmax have been simulated. The starting population was choosen to N(0)  =  Nmax / 100.

In order to get better statistics several runs have been made with a different seed value for the random number generator, when computer time was available.

Constant dominance

To take the effect of dominant and recessive genes into account, a dominance 32 bit long string was generated for the whole population with d = 6 randomly set bits. Deletrious mutations only take effect if either both genome strings have the according bit set or one string has it set and the bit is marked as dominant by the dominance string.

As can be seen in table [\ref=simple:sim:pop] the hermaphroditic populations consistantly reached a stable population of N0 / Nmax  ≈  0.23 whereas the sexually reproducing populations reached N0 / Nmax  ≈  0.17. No significant difference was found for longer simulation time or larger populations.

Dominance self emergence

I started from the standard Penna model with sexual and hermaphroditic reproduction. Each individual now has a dominance bit string attached. With every reproduction one bit in this string is flipped with a probability of p  =  0.01. This dominance string is then used to determine the activity of a deletrious mutation just as in the constant dominance model. As in recent simulations

[formula]

Partner selection style

In recent simulations

[formula]

Population

As can be seen in figure 4 in the hermaphroditic case a stable population of N0 / Nmax  ≈  0.23 was reached, whereas the sexual reproduction scheme reached N0 / Nmax  ≈  0.17, The different partner selection styles simulated did not produce important differences.

Summary

All simulations consistantly showed that hermaphroditism reaches a higher stable population size than sexual reproduction. The Penna model thus does not explain the evidence found in nature that sexual reproduction offers severe benefits over hermaphroditic reproduction. This known feature of the Penna model has been confirmed.

Several researchers have tried to give an explanation for sexual reproduction in comparison to asexual reproduction. Other reproduction schemes (especially meiotic parthenogenesis) have also been analysed. See chapter 2.5.5 in Evolution, Money, War and Computers by Oliviera, Oliviera and Stauffer

[formula]

References