Cosmological Voids: Observational Evidence and Models

Observational Evidence

The first observation of a large region of universe not containing any visible matter was made in 1981 by Kirshner et al.[\cite=kirshner]. Starting from the discovery of this huge void (about 80Mpc in diameter) of matter in Boötes, galaxy surveys analysis showed that a considerable fraction of the volume of the universe is occupied by empty regions containing only few visible galaxies. These regions have been named Cosmological Voids. Studying the characteristic features of these structures is surely relevant to a deeper understanding of the large scale structure of the universe. Nevertheless, present observational data allow to outline some general features only: cosmological voids seem to occupy about 40% in volume of the universe; they have quasi-spherical simmetry; they have typical diameters of the order of 10  ÷  20Mpc; the morphological properties of galaxies located inside or nearby a void are not considerably different from the cosmological background.

The most detailed observational studies on the subject have been made by a research group working in USA at the Departement of Physics of Drexel University in Philadelphia (see, for example, Hoyle et al.[\cite=hoyle]). These studies are based on an automated alghorithm developed by El-Ad et al.[\cite=el-ad] and named Voidfinder, which allows to construct a void survey starting from a galaxy survey.

Let's briefly outline how Voidfinder works. The analysis of the galaxy survey starts by dividing the galaxies in two subgroups: void galaxies and boundary galaxies. Void galaxies are those having not more than two neighbour galaxies in a sphere of radius r centered on them (usually r is fixed to 5Mpc). All the remaining galaxies in the survey are boundary galaxies. The algorithm then divides the volume occupied by the galaxy survey in cubical cells of appropriate volume (chosen by user) and search for those cells not containing boundary galaxies. Now an approximated procedure determines the positions of the centers and radii of comoving spheres containing no boundary galaxies. Those are the cosmological voids contained in the galaxy survey.

Applying Voidfinder to the 2dFGRS galaxy survey, Hoyle et al. find 289 cosmological voids with average radius of [formula], density contrast with respect to the cosmological background of - 0.95 and occupying about 40% of the volume of the survey.

Models

The observational evidences mentioned in the previous section has generated great interest concerning the construction of models capable of explaining the actual distribution of matter inside cosmological voids and their formation mechanism.

It is generally accepted that there is strong correlation between the morphology of galaxies and the density of their formation environment. More in particular, elliptical galaxies are more likely to form in higher density environments (for example in clusters) while spirals are more common where the density is lower. This morphology-density correlation, originally foreseen in the so called biased galaxy formation picture, is supported by several observational studies (see for example Goto et al.[\cite=gotoetal]) and is particularly relevant to investigate the possible presence of matter inside the voids. In fact, if the voids are completely devoided of matter as suggested by observations, then the galaxies we observe nearby their boundaries should present a strongly characteristic morphological distribution because they formed in an enviroment in which the density of matter is rapidly falling from values near to the average cosmological background (outside the void) to extremely low values (inside the void). So far there is no conclusive observational evidence concerning the existence of this characteristic distribution. To solve this apparent contradiction, we should admit the possibility that the internal part of the voids contains some form of dark matter (as originally stated by Peebles[\cite=peebles]). Already in Kirshner et al.[\cite=kirshner], the authors stated that inside the void could be present an over-density of galaxies with very low brightness that we are still not able to observe. This is the main open issue related to cosmological voids.

Another important issue is the one concerning the models for void formation. Among the various models presented so far, we may quote the one originally introduced by Friedmann and Piran[\cite=Friedmann], accordingly to which voids form from the comoving expansion of negative primordial perturbations in the density field. Several N-body simulations of this formation mechanism based on the cold dark matter scenario produced results which are consistent with observational data.

More recently another formation mechanism was proposed by Stornaiolo[\cite=Stornaiolo]. In this scenario the collapse of extremely large wavelength positive perturbations led to the formation of low density/high mass black holes (Cosmological Black Holes or CBH). Voids are then formed by the comoving expansion of the matter surrounding the collapsed perturbation. According to this model, at the center of each cosmological void (assumed to be spherical) a CBH having a mass

[formula]

is present. In ([\ref=Voidmass]) the parameter

[formula]

represents the ratio of the density ρcbh of all the CBHs contained in the universe to the critical density as observed at the present time ρc0 and R is the radius of the void. The mass of the CBH partially or completely "compensate" the lack of matter in the volume occupied by the void according to the values of Ωcbh. The actual value of this parameter has to be adjusted according to future observational estimates of CBH mass. Nevertheless, at this stage, it is reasonable to assume that ρcbh has the same value of the observed matter density ρmatter scaled by the fraction of the volume of the universe occupied by the voids. This assumption implies [formula]. In a void about 25Mpc in diameter we then have a CBH with mass of the order of [formula].

Testing the Models. Voids as Gravitational Lenses

Observational studies concerning cosmological voids are mainly intended to investigate their matter content. So this section will be focused on this issue only. To understand if there is matter inside a void one can use essentially three main kinds of observational studies: studying the morphology of galaxies nearby the void; studying the dispersion of the peculiar velocities of galaxies nearby the void; studying the void as a gravitational lens deflecting the light coming from background sources and/or producing perturbations on the CMB anisotropy.

I have already discussed the morphology of "void galaxies" in the previous section. What can be said about the dispersion of velocities is that, as in the case of galaxy morphology, the observations made so far suggest that there could be some ammount of matter inside the voids[\cite=peebles] but they are not conclusive.

The gravitational lensing properties of voids have so far remained a topic treated only in theoretical papers. This is due to the fact that if the voids are filled with low brightness (and, because of this, not visible) ordinary galaxies then they would have no observable peculiar gravitational lensing effect and, as pointed out by Amendola et al.[\cite=amendola], this is true even in case the voids are completely devoided of matter. One case of interest is represented by the model proposed by Stornaiolo[\cite=Stornaiolo]. In the article[\cite=serpico], the coauthors and me have presented the results of several simulations of gravitational lensing effects produced by a cosmological void structured according to this model. With regard to its lensing properties, the CBH contained in the void acts on background sources as a Schwarzschild lens. According to our simulations the CBH should produce three potentially observable lensing effects which are described in the following.

A Schwarzschild lens produces double images of background sources having a caratheristic angular separation which depends on the mass and distance of the lens. For ordinary Swarzschild lenses this angular separation assumes typical values of about 10 seconds of arc. A typical CBH located at comoving distance of 80Mpc from us and with a mass of [formula] produces several double images with angular separation of about 6 primes of arc. Once one knows the position of the center of a void (and its distance and radius) in a galaxy survey, he can search for couples of galaxies nearby this center and having angular separation of about 6 primes of arc. Comparing spectra one can then verify the presence of double images.

Each double image produced by a Schwarzschild lens is composed by a quite strongly magnified primary and by a fainter secondary image. Due to the production of many secondary images of background galaxies a typical CBH considerably alters the number of faint galaxies with redshifts larger than that of the center of the void and observed in its proximity. This effect could be observed performing a galaxy count in a suitable solid angle centered on the void and verifying the presence of an increase in the number of faint (m > 21) galaxies with respect to galaxy number counts performed in an equal solid angle not containing any void.

The production of double images together with the magnification effect also determine a characteristic profile in the observed radial distribution of galaxies around the CBH. This is a peculiar feature of the CBH lensing effects, which is due to its huge mass and would not be present for any ordinary Schwarzschild lens. For a detailed description of this effect see Serpico et al.[\cite=serpico].

The three gravitational lensing effects I have mentioned are all strong signatures of the existence of Cosmological Black Holes. The possibility to observe these effects is connected to the use of a galaxy survey deep enough in magnitudes and to the necessity of having a suitable void survey derived from the same galaxy survey. We hope the Sloan Digital Sky Survey could serve to this scope in the future and that the tests we proposed for the CBH-void model could be conclusive. In the future we are also planning to investigate the CBH effect on the Cosmic Microwave Background.