On the possibility of making the complete computer model of a human brain

The aim of this short note is to point out to the concrete opportunity of building of a complete computer model of the human brain. At present time an architecture of the artificial neural networks (ANNs), as well as the properties of neurons forming them, is set by their developers empirically. The difficulty lies in that the brain has a huge number of neurons and yet a lot more number of the connections between them. Besides, in itself a neuron is a very complex cell which functions as an element of information processing are not yet studied completely. There is no even a hint at the theory that can answer the question about an order of the formation of the connections between neurons at an embryo development. (This question pretends to the generality since the structure of a cerebral cortex of infants is almost identical.) That is why a computer simulation of the biological neuronets is embarrassed even in a view of the essential progress in the field of an experimental diagnostics of a brain. On the other hand, the requirements in the ANNs which are commensurable by the efficiency with a human brain grow. The progress in molecular biology and genetics enables to build some algorithm, which work results in a generation of the full-featured computer model of a brain. The point is that the nature has created a compact memo book which contains all the data about the structure and operation principles of a brain. This book is a deoxyrybonucleic acid (DNA) molecule. DNA of an organism consists of a set of genes which is called a genome. The genes are the instructions (for some molecular machines) of how to create the cells and tissues of an organism. For example, it is known that the number of genes involved in development and functioning of a human brain equals 3195 (see, e.g., [\cite=1]). Thus the creation of the brain model is reduced to the decoding corresponding parts of a DNA code and an iterative construction of an ANN in accordance with the "instructions" obtained. Certainly, the realization of such an algorithm will demand an enormous computing capacity and computer memory. However, the fast growth of these characteristics gives a hope for such an opportunity.

Note that the character of an interaction of the model with a suitable biological sample (it can be, for example, an alive part of human body) can serve as a simple criterion of the model operability. If the sample and the model communicate with each other as two biological samples among themselves (or as two parts of one sample), the model is evidently adequate and complete.