Comments on the "Reply" presented in hep-ph/0701058v1

Problems and discussions

A reply was presented on the arXiv:hep-ph by D.V. Bugg[\cite=ref1] to the article[\cite=ref2] of myself. In this comments I shall try to explain further the physics view underlying our analysis, concentrating only on the subjects, the combined fit and Adler zero in the analyses of ππ/Kπ scattering and production processes near threshold. The cancellation mechanism in the scattering amplitudes is also mentioned. They may be vital points to be discussed for clarification of the problems still in argument.

Basic physics picture underlying each analysis  :

Before going into comments in detail, I would summarize briefly the essential points of our analysis on ππ/Kπ phase shift data and our observation of σ/κ in production processes. It has long been believed that a production amplitude F should be proportional to the scattering amplitude T as F = α(s)T, where α(s) is real and slowly varying function of s due to the requirement from the elastic unitarity and the final state interaction. α(s) is model-dependent and is expressed in terms of arbitrary parameters in the conventional method. In the analysis of the article[\cite=ref3] for a production process, the α(s) is expressed with the fixed zero-point of T(s) at sT0 as α(s) = α(s) / (s - sT0). Then, the huge event accumulation in the ππ production near threshold obtained at the ISR experiment at CERN was treated as backgrounds.

Contrarily, Sigma group has analyzed the ππ/Kπ scattering phase shift data by the interfering amplitude method[\cite=ref4] which satisfies the generalized unitarity of S-matrix. We have also analyzed ππ/Kπ production data independently from the scattering process by the variant mass and width method[\cite=ref5] where all terms and their parameters have physical meaning, such as coupling constant, mass and width of relevant particles. The base of S-matrix in our method includes unstable resonant particles as well as stable ones based on quark physics picture. Especially, in the case of ππ/Kπ scattering and production processes, the base of S-matrix includes the relevant unstable particle, σ/κ as well as stable ones, π and K. While the conventional method includes only stable particles.

Repulsive background phase shifts  :

The scattering phase shift data are analyzed by the interfering amplitude method with the introduction of the repulsive background phase shift, δBG, which behaves like a hard core. The phase shifts due to the σ particle, δσ interferes strongly with δBG, resulting in the cancellation between them. The repulsive background phase shift, δBG has the experimental base. It is recognized that I = 2 ππ phase shifts, δ(2)ππ, where no resonance is expected, decrease monotonically from threshold up to 1.2 GeV, suggesting the existence of a hard core-like structure. Moreover, it has the theoretical support originating from the compensating λφ4 contact interaction term in LσM.[\cite=ref6] Both δ(2)ππ and δBG obtained in the analysis show an agreement well with the expectation from LσM.

The statement in the reply , "The background needs to be parameterized empirically" may be from an overlooking of this origin.

Adler zero and the threshold suppression in production processes

Non appearance of threshold suppression in most of production processes  :

The cancellation mechanism causes the threshold suppression in the ππ/Kπ scattering processes, corresponding to Adler zero. On the other hand in ππ/Kπ production processes though Adler zero exists in the processes, the threshold suppression does generally not occur, since the produced ππ / Kπ has large energy transferred in most cases of production processes. That means Adler zero does not always result in occurrence of threshold suppression in a production process. M. Ishida et al.[\cite=ref7] have analyzed ππ spectra in Υ decays, Υ(3S  →  1S) and [formula]. The results show how the threshold suppression occurs in the Υ(2S  →  1S) process and how does not in the Υ(3S  →  1S), taking Adler zero in consideration. In the Υ(3S  →  1S) where the pion energy becomes enough larger than mπ gives no zero close to the threshold.

By the way, it is mentioned in the reply relating with the mechanism of the threshold suppression that "I see no obvious reason why the same contact term should appear in production process which have drastically different left-hand cut." In our analysis on production processes the compensating λφ4 contact interaction term plays no effective role at large energy transferred.

Anyhow, experimentally a σ/κ signal can mostly be seen explicitly in a production processes and in a certain case can not be, as is seen in examples mentioned above. This is also the reason why the production process should be analyzed separately from the scattering process in order to search for an existence of a σ/κ resonance and why the resonance parameters should be determined separately from the scattering process in a phenomenological analysis.

Combined fit and Adler zero  :

In order to account for the difference between the ππ/Kπ scattering amplitude and ππ/Kπ production amplitudes near threshold, the suppression factor, (s - sA) has been introduced explicitly into the width of the scattering process by the author of the reply (p.3 of ref.  and p.110 of ref. ). When the scattering amplitude T is unitarized by the N/D method under the prescription, F = α(s)T, where α(s) is a real and slowly varying function of s with the correction on α(s) introducing an artificial factor, (s - sA) as α(s)  →  {1 / (s - sA)}α(s), this prescription in the N(s) produces the (s - sA) factor on the imaginary part of D(s). It is also postulated in the combined fit that this D(s) function with the (s - sA) factor should be used for all the production processes. From our view point, the combined fit leads to the properties of relevant resonant particles which might be distorted from the proper ones to be determined through the quark-gluon dynamics. The reason is that the produced ππ/Kπ states in the general production processes contain not only the re-scattered ones but also the ones coming directly through the σ/κ production.

Concluding remarks

The difference is discussed between our method and the conventional one for the description of the processes, referring to each underlying physics picture. The former takes unstable particles as well as stable ones as the basic fields of S-matrix, while the latter takes only the stable particles. These two pictures may be consistent with each other so far as we treat interactions among stable particles, but will lead to decisively different methods of analyses, when unstable particles concern, as is seen on the mechanism of the threshold suppression concerning the Adler zero, for instance.

The author of the reply mentions on the data set used in the analyses. The statement of the BES collaboration at the Hadron'05 in Rio de Janeiro has answered to the problem.