Kikuo Harigaya

Fundamental Physics Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory, Umezono 1-1-4, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305, Japan

(Received                                   )

ABSTRACT We theoretically investigate optical absorption spectra of C6 -60 and C6 -70, and discuss relations with the optical properties of alkali metal doped fullerides A6C60 and A6C70. This is a valid approach for systems where Frenkel exciton effects are dominant. We use a tight binding model with long ranged Coulomb interactions and bond disorder. Optical spectra are obtained by the Hartree-Fock approximation and the configuration interaction method. We find that the Coulomb interaction parameters, which are relevant to the optical spectra of A6C60 (A6C70) in order to explain the excitation energies and relative oscillator strengths of absorption peaks, are almost the half of those of the neutral C60 (C70). The reduction of the effective Coulomb interactions is concluded for the heavily doped case of C60 and C70. This finding is closely related with the experimental fact that dielectric constants of fullerides which are maximumly doped with alkali metals become about twice as large as those of the neutral systems.

PACS numbers: 78.66.Qn, 78.20.Dj, 71.35.+z, 31.20.Tz

INTRODUCTION

Since the C60 solid and A3C601 with the novel high temperature superconductivity were discovered, fullerenes have been intensively investigated. As the π electrons are delocalized on their surfaces, the fullerenes show optical responses that are similar to those in π conjugated polymers.2 For example, the absorption spectra of C60 (Refs. 3 and 4) and C70 (Ref. 3) reflect the existence of excitons (mainly Frenkel excitons) which are important when the excitation energy is larger than the order of 1eV. The nonlinearity of C60 in the third harmonic generation (THG) is of the order 10- 11esu,5,6 and the similar magnitudes have been observed in polydiacetylenes.

Recently, we have studied the linear absorption and the THG of C60 by using a tight binding model7 and a model with a long ranged Coulomb interaction.8,9 A free electron model yields the THG magnitudes which are in agreement with the experiments of C60.5,6 However, when the Coulomb interactions are taken into account, the THG magnitudes decrease.8 We have discussed that the local field correction would be necessary in order to recover the agreement. The model with Coulomb interactions has turned out to describe well the linear absorption spectra of C60 and C70 in solutions.9

In the first half part of this paper, we perform calculations for C6 -60 and consider the optical spectra of A6C60 (A  =   K, Rb, Cs, etc). This compound is a fulleride maximumly doped with alkali metals, and is an insulator like the neutral C60. The optical spectra have been measured in several papers.10,11 The peak structures in the energy dependence are quite different from those of the neutral C60, even though each peak could be explained as an optical transition between molecular orbitals. The absorption spectra of the neutral C60 and A3C60 are rather similar, but the data of A6C60 are largely different. It seems that main peaks of the neutral C60 spectra move to lower energies. This fact could be explained by reduction of the effective Coulomb interaction strengths. The principal purpose of the present calculations is to confirm this viewpoint. The calculation method is the same as that used in the previous paper.9 We start from the Hartree-Fock approximation and perform configuration interaction calculations which are limited to single electron-hole excitations (single CI). In the experiments of A6C60,10,11 intermolecular interactions seem to be relatively weak, because there is not a peak structure owing to the intermolecular interactions (like the 2.8eV structure in the C60 films4). Therefore, we shall limit our considerations to the system C6 -60. This is a reasonable approximation for systems where single molecular contributions (Frenkel exciton effects) are dominant.

The reduction of the Coulomb interactions means that dielectric constants of the doped systems increase. Actually, the electron-energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) studies of RbxC60 and RbxC70 (x  =  0,3,6)12 have revealed that the real part of the dielectric function at zero frequency increases from x = 0 to 6, and the magnitude becomes about twice. In our calculations by single molecule models, this enhancement of the dielectric functions is represented by the decrease of the phenomenological parameters in Coulomb interactions.

In the last part of the paper, we consider C6 -70 in order to discuss optical properties of the insulating phase A6C70. Frenkel excitons would be dominant in this system again. We demonstrate that the picture of the reduction of Coulomb strengths is relevant to C70 also. Therefore, the reduction of Coulomb interaction strengths is a common property seen in two kinds of fullerenes. In fact, the EELS studies12 have concluded that π electronic systems in RbxC60 and RbxC70 show a non-rigid-band behavior and excitation energies become smaller upon doping.

In the next section, we explain our model briefly. In Sec. III, we show results of C6 -60 and give discussion relating with molecular orbital structures. In Sec. IV, we consider C6 -70. The final section is devoted to the summary.

omitted afterwards ...