The soft X-ray Cluster-AGN spatial cross-correlation function in the ROSAT-NEP survey.

Introduction

The current paradigm of galaxy formation assumes that all types of galaxies reside in dark matter (DM) haloes, and that the properties of these haloes determine to some extent the properties of the galaxies inside (White & Rees 1978). In general, the clustering amplitudes of haloes depend on halo mass. The relation between the clustering properties of both DM haloes and galaxies (biasing) should thus tell us something about the physical processes leading to the formation and evolution of galaxies. Clusters of galaxies are the highest peaks in the global mass distribution of the Universe and should follow a direct and simple biasing scheme - mainly related to the underlying primordial Gaussian random field (Kaiser 1987). A simple means towards a better understanding of galaxy biasing is thus provided by studies of the relative biasing between galaxies and clusters of galaxies.

As a first step, previous investigations estimated two-point statistics like the auto-correlation function (Mullis et al. 2004, Gilli et al. 2005, Basilakos et al. 2005, Yang et al. 2006). They could show that, in fact, AGNs trace the underlying cosmic large-scale structure. In addition, the large-scale structure of X-ray selected galaxy clusters could be studied in some detail (e.g. Schuecker et al. 2001), but without investigating the link between clusters and AGNs.

In the present paper, we concentrate on the study of the relative clustering between X-ray selected AGNs and galaxy clusters. Our work improves on most previous work on the large-scale structure of X-ray selected AGNs in two important aspects. First, with the exception of Mullis et al. (2004), our sample is the only one that is spectroscopically complete (99.6%). Gilli et al. (2005) used the CDFS ( 35%) and the CDFN (50%). The Basilakos et al. (2005) sample had almost no spectroscopic redshifts. Yang et al. (2006) used the CLASXS sample (52% complete) and the CDFN (56% complete).

Another motivation for our work is that over the last several years, X-ray observations revealed that a significant fraction of high-z clusters of galaxies show overdensities of AGNs in their outskirts (i.e. between 3 h- 170 Mpc and 7 h- 170 Mpc from the center of the cluster) (Henry et al., 1991; Cappi et al., 2001; Ruderman & Ebeling 2005, Cappelluti et al., 2005, and references therein). These overdensities were however detected in randomly selected archive targeted observations of galaxy clusters. While these overdensities are highly significant (up to 8σ) when compared to cluster-free fields, the incompleteness of the samples does not allow drawing any conclusion about the average clustering properties of AGNs around clusters. The majority of the sources making these overdensities have no spectroscopical identification and therefore any information on their spatial clustering is lost. More recently Branchesi et al. (2007) showed that at high-z the source surface density of AGNs significantly increases even in the central regions of the clusters. These results imply that further progress will come from studying the three dimensional spatial distribution of AGNs around clusters. A natural way to characterize this specific type of clustering is given by the three-dimensional cross-correlation of AGNs and galaxy clusters, the computation of which needs complete redshift information for all objects, which is rare in X-ray surveys.

In this respect, the ROSAT North Ecliptic Pole (NEP) survey (Henry et al., 2001,2006; Voges et al., 2001) is one of the few X-ray surveys covering a sufficiently large volume with an almost complete follow-up identification of AGNs and clusters (i.e. 440 sources spectroscopically identified of 442 detected). This survey thus provides a very useful basis for more precise investigations of the relative clustering properties of these two types of objects.

We organized the present paper in the following way. In Sect. 2, we describe the ROSAT-NEP survey data which we use for our investigations of the spatial distribution of X-ray selected AGNs and galaxy clusters. For the statistical analysis we estimate their cross-correlation. A useful estimator for this statistic and the mock samples needed for its determination are described in Sects. 3 and 4, respectively. The results are presented in Sect. 5, and are discussed in Sect. 6. In this paper, we assume a (concordance) Friedmann-Lemaitre Universe characterized by the Hubble constant given in units of h70 = H0 / (70  km  s- 1  Mpc- 1), the normalized cosmic matter density Ωm = 0.3, and the normalized cosmological constant ΩΛ = 0.7. Unless otherwise stated, errors are reported at the 1σ confidence level.

The data

The ROSAT NEP survey covers a region of [formula] deg2 around the North Ecliptic Pole (17h15m  <  α  <  18h45m, 62o  <  δ  <  71o) observed with the PSPC proportional counter as part of the ROSAT All Sky Survey (Henry et al., 2001; Voges et al., 2001) with a flux limit of 2[formula]erg cm- 2 s- 1 in the 0.5-2 keV energy band. 442 X-ray sources were detected and 440 optically identified. Spectroscopic redshift information is available for 219 AGNs and 62 clusters of galaxies. The clusters have redshifts z  ≤  0.81 with a median of 0.18 and the AGNs have z  ≤  3.889 with a median of 0.4 (Fig. [\ref=fig:dndz]). For the purpose of this work we selected all the clusters and the 185 AGNs with z  ≤  1 (Gioia et al. 2003). Such a dataset was used also by Mullis et al. (2004) for the calculation of the 3-D auto correlation function of X-ray selected AGNs. Mullis and collaborators find significant clustering on scales smaller than ~   43 h- 170 Mpc with a correlation length of ~   10.4 h- 170 Mpc, and a slope of the correlation best-fit power law of γ=1.8.

Cluster-AGN spatial cross-correlation

The cross-correlation function ξCA of clusters and AGNs is defined by the joint probability to find, at a distance r, one cluster in the infinitesimal comoving volume element δVC and one AGN in the comoving volume element δVA,

[formula]

where nC and nA are the mean comoving number densities of clusters and AGNs, respectively. In calculating the differential cross-correlation in redshift space we used an adapted version of the Landy-Szalay estimator (Landy & Szalay, 1993; see also e.g. Blake et al., 2006),

[formula]

where DCDA, RCDA, RADC and RARC are the normalized number of pairs in the i-th redshift space separation s bin for the clusters data-AGNs data, cluster random-AGNs data, AGNs random-clusters data and clusters random-AGNs random samples, respectively. Using the symbols D and R to represent the data and random samples, respectively, and C and A to identify clusters and AGNs, respectively, the normalized pairs are expressed by

[formula]

Here, NDA,NDC,NRA,NRC are the total numbers of AGNs and clusters in the data and in the randomly generated samples, respectively. The quantities npair represent, adopting the symbolism used above, the actual number of pairs measured in the random and data samples as a function of the redshift space separation si. The distances were computed assuming for the position of the clusters the centroid of the X-ray emission while for AGNs the optical positions were adopted. In order to have a good signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) the data were grouped in logarithmic bins of Δ log (sh- 170 Mpc)=0.15.

Random Samples

Equation [\ref=eq:ccf] indicates that an accurate estimate of the distribution function of the random samples is crucial in order to obtain a reliable estimate of ξCA. Several effects must be taken into account when generating a sample of objects in a flux limited survey. Simulated AGNs were randomly placed within the ROSAT NEP survey area. In order to reproduce the flux distribution of the real sample, we followed the method of Mullis et al. (2004). In practice since the cumulative AGNs logN-logS source counts distribution can be described by a power law, S = kS-  α, with α = 1.3, the differential probability scales as S- (α + 1). Using a transformation method (e.g. Press et al. 1986, chapter 7) we see that the random flux above a certain X-ray flux Slim is distributed as [formula], where p is a random number uniformly distributed between 0 and 1 and Slim=2[formula] erg cm- 2 s- 1, i.e. the flux limit of the NEP survey. All random AGNs with a flux lower than the flux limit map (see Fig. 4 in Henry et al., 2006) at the source position were excluded. In order to assign a redshift to these "sources" we computed the predicted redshift distribution at the position of each accepted source. Once the flux limit at the position where the source was randomly placed is known, and denoting with φ(L,z) the luminosity function, then the number of sources per redshift interval dz is given by

[formula]

where Lmin is the minimum luminosity observable at redshift z with a local flux limit Slim and dV(z) the differential comoving volume element. The k-correction does not play any role in the calculations since we assumed an average spectral index Γ=2 (as in Mullis et al. 2004) for all AGNs. For the luminosity function φ(L,z) we took the luminosity-dependent density evolution (LDDE) best fit model of Hasinger et al. (2005). A redshift was then randomly assigned to each source via Monte Carlo integration of the predicted redshift distribution. For galaxy clusters we applied the same procedure assuming a slope of the logN-logS distribution of α=1.3, as luminosity function an A-B evolving Schechter model ([\cite=ros02]) with the parameters obtained by [\cite=mulxlf] and using a sensitivity map specific for NEP clusters ([\cite=hen06]). Since for clusters of galaxies the k-correction is not negligible, we assigned to the random clusters an intrinsic spectrum according to a MEKAL spectral model with a plasma temperature kT=3 keV and a metallicity [formula]. We also applied to Lmin a "size-correction" according to the results of Henry et al. (2006) in order to compensate for the missing flux in the X-ray photometry aperture and the variation of the angular dimensions of the object with z. Such a procedure was repeated until we populated the survey volume with 37200 random AGNs and 12600 random clusters (i.e. 200 times more objects than in the real data sample). The redshift distribution of the random cluster and AGN samples are plotted in Fig. [\ref=fig:dndz] together with the real data. To obtain a realistic estimate of the uncertainties of the cross correlations we used the bootstrap resampling technique described by e.g. Ling, Frenk and Barrow (1986).

Results

We present the spatial cross-correlation function between clusters and AGNs in Fig. [\ref=fig:ccf]. A positive clustering signal is detected in the distance interval s  ≤  50 h- 170 Mpc. In order to test the strength of the clustering we performed a canonical power-law fit,

[formula]

with s0 and γ as free parameters. The fit can be done using the coarsely binned data in Fig. [\ref=fig:ccf] and minimizing the χ2 statistics. However, this approach is extremely sensitive to the size and distribution of the bins. In order to overcome this problem we performed a standard maximum likelihood power-law fit to unbinned data. The comoving separation s was parsed in very small bins so that there are either 0 or 1 data pairs for any given interval. In this regime Poisson probabilities are appropriate. In order to perform the fit, we need to find the predicted probability distribution of the cluster-AGN pairs for each value of γ and s0. We calculated the number of predicted pairs by replacing ξCA(s) in Eq. [\ref=eq:ccf] with the model given by Eq. [\ref=power] and using DCDA(s) (hereinafter λ(s)ds) as variable. We can then use the separations of all the N cluster-AGN pairs to form a likelihood function. This is defined as the product of the probabilities of having exactly one pair in the interval ds at each separation si of the N pairs times the probability of having no pairs in all the other differential intervals. This for all s in a chosen range (sa - sb), in our case where ξCA(s) can be reasonably represented by a power law. Assuming Poisson probabilities we thus obtain the likelihood

[formula]

where λ(si)ds is the expected number of pairs in the interval ds, and the index j runs over all the elements ds which do not contain pairs. We then define the usual quantity S =  - 2 ln   ~  L and drop the terms independent of model parameters (see e.g. [\cite=sch98] [\cite=cro97]) leading to

[formula]

In order to check in which range of separations we can conduct our analysis, we transformed the angular separations between clusters and AGNs into an average redshift space separation. We assumed that all the sources were at < z > =0.38 (i.e. the median redshift of the cluster and AGN sample). The result is plotted in Fig. [\ref=fig:pairs]. As one can see there are no real pairs with separation <   2 h- 170 Mpc. For this reason we decided not to consider points at separation lower than 2.5 h- 170 Mpc. These points in the cross-correlation function are mainly introduced by the parameters RCDA, RADC in Eq. [\ref=eq:ccf] which could have smaller separations than the real data since the random sample includes neither the extended emission of the clusters nor the broadening due to the PSF of pointlike sources. This prevents us also from overestimates of the correlation length introduced by the amplification bias (see e.g [\cite=vik]). For this reason and since on scales larger than 50 h- 170 Mpc there is no evidence of signal, the fit was performed over the distance range 2.5-50 h- 170 Mpc. In Fig. [\ref=fig:conts] we show the results of the maximum-likelihood power-law fit to ξCA(s) for the ROSAT NEP survey. The 1, 2 and 3σ were obtained at Δ ~ S levels of 2.3, 6.2 and 11.8 from the minimum value of S. The best fit parameters obtained are s0=8.7+ 1.2- 0.3 h- 170 Mpc and γ=1.7+ 0.2- 0.7 where the uncertainty is at the 1σ confidence level. With γ fixed to 1.8 (i.e. a typical value found in galaxy-galaxy correlation function) we find s0  ~  8.5h- 170 Mpc, a similar value was obtained by extending the fitting region to 60 h- 170 Mpc and restricting it to the 2.5-40 h- 170 Mpc.

The integral constraint ([\cite=pee80]), which is a systematic shift in correlation functions introduced by the limited volume observed, was computed following the prescription of [\cite=ro93]. This can be obtained numerically with a fit by assuming that the correlation function is represented by a power law of fixed index (here we used γ=1.7) on all scales sampled by the survey. The underestimate of ξCA(s) due to the integral constraint is found to be of order 2%. In order to determine the stability of these results the procedure was repeated first by separating the field in two subfields twice, the North and South, and West and East parts of the survey. The fluctuations due to sample variance are found to be smaller than the typical amplitude of the uncertainties. A similar result is obtained by recomputing the ξCA(s) for clusters with z  ≤  0.18 (i.e. the cluster median redshift) and z > 0.18. The dependence of ξCA(s) on the cluster X-ray luminosity (LX) was evaluated dividing the cluster sample into two subsamples with LX  ≤  (or  ≥  )3.8  ×  1043 h- 270 erg s- 1. Though no significant LX dependent behaviour was detected, we cannot yet conclude that there is no luminosity or redshift dependent cross-correlation length because of the low-statistics of the sub-samples. The stability of the result was also checked fitting the data with the likelihood estimator used by Mullis et al. (2004) returning no significant deviations from our results at 1-2 σ level.

Discussion

We presented here the first direct evidence of spatial clustering of soft X-ray selected AGNs around X-ray selected clusters of galaxies. Indirect evidence was presented by Henry et al. (1991), Cappi et al. (2001), Cappelluti et al. (2005) (and references therein). These authors found significant X-ray point source overdensities (about a factor 2) around distant clusters of galaxies when compared to cluster-free fields. If the overdensities were at the cluster redshift they would arise at scales smaller than ~  7 h- 170 Mpc. Since the correlation function is proportional to [formula], a ξCA=1 implies an overdensity of a factor 2 with respect to a randomly distributed field. We can conclude that, since the correlation length found in this work reflects the scale of the overdensities known up to now, we observe a physical overdensity (of at least a factor 2) of AGNs around clusters between 2 and ~   8 h- 170 Mpc from the center of the clusters. Because of the shallowness of the NEP survey, the AGN surface density (i.e. <  30 deg2 in the central region) does not allow detection of such a correlation via overdensity analysis since it would be dominated by small number statistics. In fact, from our results we expect to detect AGNs overdensities on scales <  7-8 h- 170 Mpc from the center of clusters. At < z >   ~  0.18 (i.e. the median z of the cluster sample of the NEP survey) these overdensities arise on scales of ~  0.6 deg- 2 which are easily resolved by the NEP survey. However to significantly detect these overdensity on single clusters, a conspicuous number of sources is necessary to disentangle real overdensities from shot noise. This problem could be easily resolved by high angular resolution telescopes like Chandra and partially by XMM- Newton. In this direction deep and wide and XMM- Newton surveys like COSMOS, which will return an AGN surface density of up to ~   2700 deg- 2, would allow seeing in a 0.015 deg2 region (i.e. the size of an ACIS-I chip) a population of at least 40 AGNs belonging to the cluster environment (i.e. assuming an average overdensity of a factor 2, we expect ~  40 sources belonging to the cluster and ~  40 to the background). As an example, at the limiting flux of the C-COSMOS survey, the AGN population of a cluster at z=1 would be observed with a 0.5-2 keV limiting luminosity Lmin  ~  1042 erg s- 1. At z=1 the size of an ACIS chip (i.e. 8 arcmin) corresponds to a linear dimension of ~  4 h- 170 Mpc. Having 40 AGNs in a sphere with this radius, corresponds to a space density of AGN with LX  >  Lmin of ~  0.15 h370 Mpc- 3. We can however state that, according to the result presented here, clusters of galaxies could be detected by AGN overdensities (rather than galaxy overdensities) if the depth of the survey would provide an AGN surface density sufficient to overcome the Poisson noise on the AGN number. In general in order to understand the galaxy evolution in dense environments the measure of cross correlation between clusters and different kind of galaxies is an important tool. We already know that infrared dusty galaxies avoid dense environments therefore showing a large cross-correlation length and weak clustering signal in the small separations region (Sánchez et al., 2005). We also know that blue galaxies avoid low-z rich clusters cores (Butcher & Oemler, 1984). It is therefore important to compare the cluster-AGN cross correlation length to that of cluster and different galaxy type. Mo et al. (1993) computed the cross-correlation function of Abell clusters and QDOT IRAS galaxies. They found an average correlation length and a slope in agreement with the results presented here. Moreover [\cite=lil] showed that the cross-correlation function of Abell clusters with Lick galaxies is positive on scales ≤  29 h- 170 Mpc with a slope γ  ~   2.2 and a correlation length of ~   12.6 h- 170 Mpc. These results are also in agreement within 1 σ with our findings on AGNs. These first comparisons already suggest that AGNs are clustered around galaxy clusters just like galaxies. As a final check we compared our ξCA to the X-ray cluster-galaxy cross-correlation function (hereinafter CGCCF) computed by [\cite=san05]. They used the X-ray selected clusters of the REFLEX survey (Böhringer et al. 2002) and the galaxies from the APM survey ([\cite=mad90]) limited to bj=20.5 mag. They found that the CGCCF behaves like a broken power-law with a cut-off distance of ~  2 h- 170 Mpc with a steeper slope at small distances. We can define the following approximate biasing relations:

[formula]

Here ξρ(s) is the autocorrelation of matter, bG,bA and bC are the bias factors relative to galaxies, AGNs and clusters, respectively. By dividing the two equations we can then derive [formula]. In order to perform this operation several effects must be taken in account.

The bias of REFLEX clusters could be slightly different from that of NEP clusters since they are differently distributed in redshift and the surveys have different limiting fluxes and X-ray luminosity distributions. [\cite=sch01] showed with the power spectrum that even having a large sample of clusters as REFLEX the error on the bias determination is still high. Since in the NEP survey we expect an even higher uncertainty it is a reasonable approximation to consider the ratio [formula] consistent to 1.

Sánchez et al. (2005) computed ξCG in real space while we work in redshift space. In order to evaluate the effect of redshift space distortion on ξCG we used the results of [\cite=cro99]. Their Figs. 3 and 5 show ξCG computed both in redshift and real space. From that work we estimate that our relative bias is affected by a ~  30% overestimate below 10 h- 170 Mpc and of ~  10% between 10 h- 170 Mpc and 20 h- 170 Mpc. Their work also indicates that ξCG does not depend on the richness of the clusters used in the calculation and that the correction for the scale independent biasing on large scales ([\cite=ka]) can be neglected when compared to the size of our uncertainties.

The ratio [formula] is plotted in Fig. [\ref=fig:bias] as a function of the distance from the center of the cluster. The shaded region shows the value of our measurement that implies that [formula]=1 when taking into account the difference between real and redshift space measurements discussed in the previous paragraph. The ratio is consistent with 1 on almost all scales. We cannot exclude, within the errors, much different values of the relative bias. Our data suggest an average relative bias consistent with unity but allow an upper limit of ~  6 (at 1σ) at separations s < 50 h- 170 Mpc. For separations s > 10 h- 170 Mpc no lower limits bigger than zero can be given. On larger scales the error increase thus it is difficult to draw any conclusion. At large separations the power-law shape of ξCG becomes uncertain, this makes a comparison of our data with those of Sánchez et al. (2005) less meaningful. We cannot exclude a significant antibiasing of AGNs when compared to galaxies, especially at low separations. Though the amplitude of the uncertainties of our data still allows a fluctuation in the relative biasing of more than a factor 2, we can conclude with a precision of 1σ that the probability for a galaxy to become an AGN is constant in the range of separations sampled in this work and that AGNs can be considered as good tracers of the dark matter distribution as are galaxies. New deep and wide field surveys such as XMM-COSMOS ([\cite=has06] [\cite=cap06]) and Chandra-COSMOS (P.I.: Martin Elvis) with their spectroscopically identified >  2000 AGNs and ~  100 clusters will improve the precision of this work and will allow us to investigate the behaviour of AGNs also in the inner regions of the clusters. In this region the observations suggest that the AGNs source density is affected by other physical effects such as merging ([\cite=rud05], Branchesi et al. 2006) or ram pressure phenomena

Summary

We derived for the first time the soft X-ray spatial cross-correlation function between clusters and AGNs using the data of the ROSAT NEP survey. A strong clustering signal was detected on scale s < 50 h- 170 Mpc. The best power-law fit parameters are s0=8.7+ 1.2- 0.3 h- 170 Mpc and γ=1.7+ 0.2- 0.7. In this work we observed that the source density of AGNs is higher near clusters than in the field. This result confirms earlier findings of overdensities of AGNs around clusters reported by many authors and improves the evidence connecting the overdensities to the large scale structure of the Universe. We also derived the relative bias between AGNs and galaxies which is consistent with one on almost all scales investigated here. This result still allows, within the errors, a factor 2 fluctuation. New wide field surveys (such as XMM-COSMOS) performed with the new generation X-ray telescopes will be useful to enlarge the statistics, to better understand the physics of AGNs in clusters and to extend the analysis to the inner regions of clusters.