Virtual Links, Orientations of Chord Diagrams and Khovanov Homology

Introduction

In the middle of nineties Lou Kauffman defined a natural extension of classical knot theory by replacing classical links with virtual links. Although introduced in a diagrammatic way, this theory was shown at its very beginning to be equivalent to study of links in thickened surfaces up to homeomorphism and stabilization by the addition and subtraction of handles that do not intersect the link.

Greg Kuperberg [\cite=Kup] showed that a representative of a virtual link in thickened surface of the minimal genus is defined up to an ambient homeomorphism. Thus, the stabilization can be eliminated at the cost of requiring minimality of the genus. This provides an opportunity to consider virtual links 100% traditional objects of 3-dimensional topology: pairs consisting of orientated compact 3-manifold and its oriented closed 1-submanifold up to orientation preserving homeomorphism, diagrammatic and stabilization free.

Therefore diagrammatic technique extended from classical links to virtual ones is extended to links in thickened surfaces. This became especially interesting due to recent development of link homology theories built on link diagrams.

This paper was written in an attempt to analyze the difficulties emerged when the construction of Khovanov homology is extended to virtual links. I analyzed few geometric objects closely related to a virtual link and found that a key role is played by an additional structure, orientation, on one of them, a signed chord diagram. Existence of this structure is solely responsible for possibility to construct Khovanov complex literally as in the classical case.

Virtual links with orientable chord diagrams appeared in various occasions: virtual links that admit checkerboard colorable diagrams, virtual links which can be made alternating by crossing changes, virtual links with zero-homologous modulo 2 irreducible model, virtual links with orientable atom, etc. I will call virtual links of this kind alternatable.

Construction of Khovanov homology with coefficients in [formula] for any virtual link is quite straightforward. It was presented by V.O.Manturov in [\cite=M1], [\cite=M2] and [\cite=M3]. In the same papers Manturov presented also two constructions of Khovanov homology with integer coefficients, but they do not generalize the original Khovanov homology of classical links and rely on preliminary geometric constructions.

Manturov's constructions of Khovanov complexes with integer coefficients split into geometric constructions cooking from an arbitrary virtual link alternatable ones, and the straightforward construction of Khovanov complex with integer coefficients which works only for alternatable links. The first construction is defined for a framed virtual link, and proceeds by doubling it. The second one relies on a two-fold covering obtained as restriction to the link of an orientation covering of a surface, on which the link is naturally placed as a zero-homologous modulo 2 curve. This surface with the link diagram and checkerboard coloring is called the atom of the link. For details see Manturov [\cite=M1], or [\cite=M2], or [\cite=M3].

The construction of Khovanov complex for alternatable virtual link does not require all information contained in the virtual link diagram. One can pass (without any loss) to Gauss diagram and then forget orientations of its chords. A signed chord diagram obtained in this way contains everything needed for building of the Khovanov complex. Alternability of a virtual link is orientability of its chord diagram.

Virtual links admit a generalization to twisted virtual links, which emerge in relation to links in oriented thickennings of non-orientable surfaces. Many link invariants, in particular Kauffman bracket and Jones polynomial, are extended to twisted virtual links and links in oriented thickennings of non-orientable surfaces.

A link in an oriented thickenning of a non-orientable surface which gives rise to oriented signed chord diagram realizes homology class dual to the first Stiefel-Whitney class of the surface. This is the widest class of links in oriented thickennings of surfaces for which the classical construction of Khovanov complex works without any modification over the integers.

This created a peculiar situation: the construction of Khovanov complex with integer coefficients works, say, for non-zero homologous links in the real projective space, but does not work for zero-homologous links in the same space. It is difficult to believe that this is not due just to a lack of technique, especially since in the theory of Heegaard-Floer homology developed by Ozsváth and Szabó, which so far was quite similar to the Khovanov homology, these two classes of links in the projective space both have homology with integer coefficients. Khovanov, Rasmussen and Manturov conjectured that there should be a twisted version of Khovanov complex which works for all virtual links.

The main part of the paper starts with yet another introduction to virtual knot theory incorporating twisted virtual links. Then we review Kauffman bracket and Jones polynomial constructions, both for classical and virtual links, and show that they are defined for any signed chord diagram. The original part of the paper is devoted to the notion of orientation of chord diagram and constructing of Khovanov homology for orientable signed chord diagrams.

I am grateful to V.O.Manturov and A.N.Shumakovich for valuable information and interesting discussions.

Post-Publication Remarks

After this paper was published, as [\cite=V], V. O. Manturov succeeded [\cite=M4] in extending Khovanov homology to arbitrary virtual links. This required a deep revision of the original construction. In particular, in the case of classical link the complex defined by Manturov [\cite=M4] is not isomorphic to the Khovanov complex (although the complexes are homotopy equivalent). The new construction also can be modified to become extendible to arbitrary signed chord diagrams. I am going to devote a separate paper to this subject.

Another generalization of the Khovanov homology is provided by a combination of the categorification of the Kauffman bracket skein module by M. M. Asaeda, J. H. Przytycki and A. S. Sikora [\cite=APS] with the Kuperberg theorem [\cite=Kup]. Conjecturally, there should exists a spectral sequence starting at the homology defined by Asaeda, Przytycki and Sikora [\cite=APS] and converging to the homology defined by Manturov [\cite=M4]. However, the homology defined by Asaeda, Przytycki and Sikora seems to be more appropriate as invariant of a link in a thickened surface: for virtual links it is less explicit due to use of Kuperberg's theorem.

Three Faces of Virtual Knot Theory

Link Diagrams and Gauss Diagrams

To describe graphically a classical link (i.e., a closed smooth 1-dimensional submanifold of [formula]), one takes its generic projection to a plane and decorates the image at double points to show over- and under-passes. This gives rise to a link diagram:

[formula]

Genericity of projection means here that this is an immersion with multiple points of multiplicity 2 at most and transversality at double points.

A link diagram is a two-dimensional picture of link. In many cases one-dimensional picture serves better. In particular, it is easier to convert to a combinatorial description, used as input data in computer programs.

A one-dimensional picture comes from a parametrization of the link:

[formula]

The source of the parametrization is decorated. First, it is oriented. Second, each over-pass is connected to the corresponding under-pass with an arrow:

[formula]

Third, each arrow is equipped with a sign:

[formula]

The sign is the local writhe of the crossing. It is +   at a crossing which looks like this: [formula], and -   at a crossing which looks like that: [formula]. The signs depend on the orientation.

The result is called a Gauss diagram of the link. Gauss diagrams were introduced in our joint paper with Polyak [\cite=PV1]. The corresponding combinatorial objects called Gauss codes can be traced back to Gauss' notebooks. Transition from Gauss codes to their geometric counter-parts, Gauss diagrams, is encouraged by geometric structures and operations, such as orientations and surgery, traditional for geometric objects, but difficult to recognize in a combinatorial context.

A Gauss diagram consists of an oriented 1-manifold (not necessarily connected) and chords connecting disjoint pairs of points on the 1-manifold. Each of the chords is oriented and equipped with a sign. The 1-manifold is called the base of the Gauss diagram.

From Gauss Diagram to Virtual Link

Not any Gauss diagram can be obtained from a link diagram, but for any Gauss diagram one can try.

Take, for example, Gauss diagram [formula], and try to reconstruct the knot. Let us start with crossings, as they are clearly described up to plane isotopy. Then connect them step by step according to the Gauss diagram:

[formula]

The next step meets obstruction, as we need to penetrate through arcs that have been drawn. But let us continue neglecting the obstructions!

[formula]

What is obtained looks like a knot diagram, but, besides usual crossings, it has double points which are not decorated. Such diagrams are called virtual link diagrams. They were introduced by Kauffman in the middle of nineties. Undecorated double points are called virtual crossings.

In the construction above, virtual crossings emerged inevitably. The only feasible way to avoid them is to attach handles to the plane and use them as bridges.

[formula]

Link Diagrams on Orientable Surfaces

A link diagram drawn on orientable surface S, instead of the plane, defines a link in a thickened surface S  ×  I. It defines a Gauss diagram, as well.

Any Gauss diagram appears in this way.

This is proven by the construction above, with handles added when needed.

For each Gauss diagram, there is the smallest orientable closed surface with a link diagram defining this Gauss diagram.

Here by smallest I mean a surface with the greatest Euler characteristic, but without components disjoint from the link diagram. To eliminate a cheap possibility of making the Euler characteristic arbitrarily large by adding disjoint empty spheres, let us require that each connected component of the surface contains a piece of the link diagram.

To construct an orientable closed surface with greatest Euler characteristic accommodating a link diagram with a given Gauss diagram, one can first construct a germ of a link diagram on an oriented compact surface, which would contain the diagram as a deformation retract, and then cap each boundary component of the surface with a disk. For details, see [\cite=KK].

A virtual link diagram may emerge as a projection to a plane of a link diagram on an orientable surface embedded in [formula].

Moves

What happens to a link diagram when the link moves? It moves, too. A generic isotopy of a link can be decomposed into a sequence of isotopies each of which changes the diagram either as an isotopy of the plane or as one of three Reidemeister moves (see Figure [\ref=moves1]). It does not matter, if the link lies in [formula] and its diagram lies on [formula], or the link lies in a thickened oriented surface and its diagram lies on the surface.

A virtual link diagram, which appeared as a plane projection of a link diagram on a surface, moves also as shown in Figure [\ref=moves2] when the link moves generically in the thickened surface.

All virtual moves can be replaced by detour moves:

Gauss diagram does not change under virtual moves. Reidemeister moves act on Gauss diagram:

Three Incarnations of Virtual Link Theory

On the first stages of its development, the classical link theory received a completely combinatorial setup. Links were represented by link diagrams and isotopies were represented by Reidemeister moves.

We see that virtual link theory has even two similar combinatorial incarnations. Virtual links (whatever they are) are represented, on one hand, by virtual link diagrams, on the other hand, by Gauss diagrams. Furthermore, virtual isotopies (whatever they are) are represented, on one hand, by Reidemeister and detour moves, on the other hand, by the moves of Gauss diagrams corresponding to Reidemeister moves.

Third incarnation, truly topological one, is provided by Greg Kuperberg [\cite=Kup]. He proved that

Virtual links up to virtual isotopy is the same as irreducible links in thickened orientable surfaces up to orientation preserving homeomorphisms.

Here irreducible means that each connected component of the thickened surface contains some part of the link and it is impossible to find a simple curve C on the surface, which is

disjoint from the projection of the link and

either non-zero homologous on the surface, or separating two parts of the link projection from each other,

and it will be still impossible after any isotopy of the link.

In fact, Kuperberg [\cite=Kup] described more specifically how a virtual link diagrams can be turned into an irreducible link in a thickened surface. He proved that a link diagram on an oriented surface can be destabilized to a link diagram of irreducible link on an oriented surface. A destabilization consists of embedded Reidemeister moves and Morse modifications of index 2 of the surface along a circle disjoint from the diagram.

Kuperberg's results bridge combinatorics (=one-dimensional topology) with the three-dimensional topology. The bridge can be used in both directions: both for extending combinatorial techniques like quantum link polynomials and link homology to links in 3-manifolds different from S3, and for using traditional topological techniques, like signatures, in the combinatorial environment.

For instance, an oriented link in a thickened surface realizes a homology class. A homeomorphism maps a link homologous to zero to a link homologous to zero. Therefore the property of being homologous to zero is a property of the virtual link. The same holds true for many other properties such as being homologous to zero modulo any number.

Further, for a link homologous to zero modulo two in a thickened oriented surface one can define a link signature. Hence one can expect that there is a purely combinatorial construction of signature for virtual links of this kind.

Twisted virtual links

Non-orientable surface can be also thickened to an oriented 3-manifold. For example, take a Möbius band M embedded in [formula] and thicken it, that is take its regular neighborhood. See Figure [\ref=moebius-th]. A neighborhood of M in [formula] is orientable and fibers over M.

To construct such a thickening, there is no need to embed a non-orientable surface to [formula]. Moreover, many of non-orientable surfaces cannot be embedded into [formula], but each of them has an orientable thickening. To thicken non-orientable surface S:

Find an orientation change curve C (like International date line) on S.

[formula]

Cut S along C:  [formula]   [formula]

Thicken: [formula].

Paste over the sides of the cut (x+,t)  ~  (x-, - t).

Although the construction seems to depend on a choice of orientation change curve, the thickening does not: it is unique up to a homeomorphism and can be described as the total space of line bundle over the surface with the first Stiefel - Whitney class equal to the Stiefel - Whitney class of the surface.

A link in an orientable thickening of a non-orientable surface has a diagram on the surface. Since the fibration of the thickened surface is not orientable one should take a special care on overpasses and underpasses. To distinguish them, one should orient the fiber over the crossing. Since it is impossible to orient all fibers coherently, the most natural solution is to use orientation of the fibration over the complement of an orientation change curve and keep the curve also shown on the diagram.

To encode also orientation of the thickening in the diagram, one has to orient the complement of an orientation change curve on the base surface. The local orientation of the base and the global orientation of the total space determine an orientation of a fiber. It is this orientation, which is used to distinguish overpasses and underpasses.

An orientation of the complement of an orientation change curve on the base surface is not determined by the link in oriented thickening of a non-oriented surface. It can be reversed on any component of the surface. The reversing switches over- and under-passings on this component, but preserves local writhes which are defined as follows.

[formula]

A generic isotopy of a link in an orientable thickening of a non-orientable surface decomposes into a sequence of isotopies each of which acts on the diagram either as an isotopy of the surface, or a Reidemeister move, or one of the following two additional moves, in which the orientation change curve is involved:

[formula]  and  [formula]

The first of these moves happens when a piece of link penetrates through the the preimage of the orientation change curve. The second happens when a crossing moves through the orientation change curve. Since the orientation of of the fiber changes at the moment, the overpass and underpass exchange.

In practice, it is convenient to cut the diagram along the orientation change curve, but keep in mind the identification which would allow to recover the cut. Say, in the case of thickened projective plane, for an orientation change curve can be taken a projective line. The cut along it gives a disk, which is much more comfortable to draw on, than the projective plane. In this case, the theory sketched above turns into the theory of diagrams for links in the projective space developed by Julia Drobotukhina [\cite=D1].

In general case links in an oriented thickening of a non-orientable surface were considered by Mario O.Bourgoin in his Research Statement [\cite=B]. He suggested also the corresponding generalization of virtual links, twisted virtual links, and announced a generalization of Kuperberg's theorem to the twisted setup.

We consider the corresponding generalization of Gauss diagrams (rather than generalization of virtual link diagrams outlined by Bourgoin [\cite=B]).

Twisted Gauss diagram is a Gauss diagram with a finite set of points marked on the base curve. No marked point coincide with an end-point of an arrow.

The two extra moves of diagrams considered above correspond to the following moves:

[formula]    and    [formula]

Stripping of the Third Dimension

Recall that a classical link diagram is a decorated generic projection of the link. The generic projection is a generic immersion. A great piece of what was said above about link diagrams can be repeated, with appropriate simplifications, about generic immersions of 1-manifold. For short, we call the image of a generic immersion of a closed 1-manifold to a surface S a generic curve on S. The immersion gives rise to a parametrization of the curve.

A closed 1-manifold with a finite number of chords connecting pairwise distinct points of the 1-manifold is called a chord diagram. The 1-manifold is called the base of the chord diagram. A chord diagram, each chord of which is equipped with orientation, is called an arrow diagram. A chord diagram, each chord of which is equipped with a sign, is called a signed chord diagram. Gauss diagrams considered above are signed arrow diagrams.

A generic immersion of a 1-manifold to a surface defines chord diagram, in which the base is the source 1-manifold and each chord connects points having the same image. If the source 1-manifold and target surface of the immersion are oriented, the chords get natural orientations: direct a chord from branch A to branch B such that the orientation at the target is defined by the basis formed of vectors which are the images of tangent vectors to A and B defining the orientation of the source and taken in this order.

In the case of a link diagram, these orientations of chords can be obtained from the orientations and local writhes involved in the Gauss diagram by multiplying them: if the sign of the arrow in Gauss diagram is +  , take its orientation intact, if the sign is -  , reverse the orientation.

Not any arrow diagram and even chord diagram can be generated by a generic immersion to plane. It was the problem attracted Gauss how to recognize which diagrams appear in this way. This problem received solutions in a number of ways, but we refrain from going into this vast matter.

A step from generic curves on an oriented surface parallel to the step from link diagrams on an oriented surface to virtual link diagrams gives rise to flat virtual knots, see D.Hrencecin, L. Kauffman [\cite=HK]. The counter-part of Reidemeister moves are flat Reidemeister moves, see [\cite=HK].

I am not aware about any counter-part of the Kuperberg Theorem, which would relate flat virtual knots considered up to flat Reidemeister moves to irreducible generic immersions of a 1-manifold to an orientable surface considered up to homeomorphism and homotopy.

Kauffman Bracket of Virtual Links

Digression on Kauffman Bracket of Classical Link

Kauffman bracket of a classical link diagram is a Laurent polynomial in A with integer coefficients

[formula]

For example,

[formula]

[formula]

Kauffman bracket is defined by the following properties:

[formula],

[formula], (here [formula] means disjoint union)

[formula] (Kauffman Skein Relation) .

Indeed, applying the last property to each crossing of a link diagram, one reduces the diagram to collections of embedded circles. Then the first two properties complete the job. This calculation can be summarized in the following state Sum Model.

A state of diagram is a distribution of markers over all crossings. At each crossing of the diagram there should be a marker specifying a pair of vertical angles: [formula],   [formula].

For example, knot diagram: [formula] has states: [formula] , [formula] , [formula], [formula] , Totally 2c states, where c is the number of crossings.

Three numbers are associated to a state s of diagram D:

the number a(s) of positive markers [formula],

the number b(s) of negative markers [formula],

the number |s| of components of the curve Ds obtained by smoothing of D along the markers of s.

For example, state [formula] has a(s) = 1,  b(s) = 3, [formula], and  |s| = 2.

The contribution of a state s to Kauffman bracket along with the calculation sketched above is Aa(s) - b(s)( - A2 - A- 2)|s|. Finally, the whole Kauffman bracket is equal to the following :state sum

[formula]

Example: consider Hopf link, [formula] [formula] [formula] A2( - A2 - A- 2)2  +  2( - A2 - A- 2)  +  A- 2( - A2 - A- 2)2  =   (A6 + 2A2 + A- 2) - 2A2 - 2A- 2 + (A2 + 2A- 2 + A- 6)  =   A6  +  A2  +  A- 2 + A- 6.

Kauffman State Sum in Terms of Gauss Diagram

Let us rewrite the state sum above in terms of Gauss diagram. Recall that to a crossing of a classical link diagram there corresponds an arrow equipped with a sign in the corresponding Gauss diagram.

[formula]

Clearly, to a smoothing of a crossing there corresponds a surgery along the corresponding arrow:

[formula]

[formula]

We see that the type of smoothing depends only on two signs, the sign of the marker and the sign of the crossing. Namely, the surgery preserves orientation, if these signs coincide; if the signs are opposite, the surgery reverses orientation.

Thus, a state and all the numerical characteristic of a state involved in the Kauffman state sum can be read from the Gauss diagram. A state of Gauss diagram is a distribution of signs (signs of markers) over the set of all of its arrows. The number |s| of components of the curve obtained by the smoothing along markers can be figured out from the Gauss diagram and signs of markers.

Moreover, for recovering of the Kauffman state sum we even do not need an important ingredient of Gauss diagram, directions of its arrows. Therefore we can forget about them. Let us check if this is a useful possibility.

Blunted Gauss Diagrams

A Gauss diagram with directions of arrows forgotten is a signed chord diagram. The forgetting of directions is called blunting, the result is called a blunted Gauss diagram.

Moves of Gauss diagrams defined by Reidemeister moves under blunting turns to the following moves of signed chord diagrams:

[formula]

[formula]

We shall call these moves Reidemeister moves of signed chord diagrams.

As shown above, Kauffman state sum is defined in terms of the corresponding blunted Gauss diagram. Such a state sum is defined for any signed chord diagram. The classical proof of invariance of the Kauffman bracket under the second and third Reidemeister moves works perfectly in the setup of signed chord diagrams. Moreover, under the first Reidemeister move the Kauffman bracket of a signed diagram behaves exactly as in the classical setup: the positive first move causes multiplication of the Kauffman bracket by - A3, the negative one, by - A- 3.

Thus, the Laurent polynomial

[formula]

where w(D) is the sum of signs of all chords of a signed chord diagram D, is invariant under all Reidemeister moves. As well-known, it is closely related to the Jones polynomial in the classical case. However, as everything here works just fine for blunted Gauss diagrams, it can be (and it was) taken as a definition of the Jones polynomial for virtual links.

Twisted Versus Blunted

Observe that under each of the additional two moves of twisted Gauss diagrams the signs of arrow do not change.

Therefore if we forget in a twisted Gauss diagram both directions of arrows and points, we get a signed chord diagram and moves of twisted Gauss diagrams turn into Reidemeister moves of signed chord diagrams.

This gives Kauffman bracket and Jones polynomial for twisted virtual links. This has been done in literature, as well. For links in oriented thickened projective plane (which is equivalent to the 3-dimensional projective space [formula], as the oriented thickened projective plane is the complement of a point in [formula]), the Kauffman bracket and Jones polynomial were defined and studied by Drobotukhina [\cite=D1] in 1990. For general twisted virtual links these polynomials and their refinement was outlined by Bourgoin [\cite=B].

At first glance, everything is preserved when we pass from the classical links to virtual and even twisted virtual ones. However, this impression is a little bit misleading. Some properties of the Kauffman bracket and Jones polynomial change drastically.

Exponents in Kauffman Bracket

As we have seen in the examples

[formula]

exponents in Kauffman bracket of a classical link are congruent to each other modulo 4.

This happens because:

the contribution Aa(s) - b(s)( - A2 - A- 2)|s| of each state has this property,

from each state we can get to any other state changing one marker a time,

and changing a single marker in a state changes a(s) - b(s) by 2 and |s| by 1.

However, this is not the case for virtual links. For example,

[formula]

[formula]

What is wrong in the proof above if the link is virtual?

Still, in the contribution Aa(s) - b(s)( - A2 - A- 2)|s| of each state all the exponents are congruent to each other modulo 4.

Still, from each state we can get to any other state changing one marker a time.

Still, changing a single marker changes a(s) - b(s) by two. However, |s| may be preserved.

Change of a single marker causes a Morse modification of the result of smoothing. In the classical case this Morse modification is embedded in plane, and therefore preserves orientation.

As well-known, a preserving orientation Morse modification of a 1-manifold changes the number of components by one. A Morse modification, which does not preserve orientation of a connected 1-manifold, preserves the number of connected components. Morse modification non-preserving orientation, would cause a shift of exponents by 2.

Orientations of Chord Diagrams

Orientation of Chord Diagram

What structure on blunted Gauss diagram would guarantee that, for any of its states, the corresponding smoothing have an orientation such that change of any marker causes a Morse modification of the result of smoothing preserving the orientation?

Such a structure is a collection of orientations of arcs of the base 1-manifold between end points of chords such that these orientations define an orientation of each smoothing. For this the orientations should have the following two properties:

The orientations cannot be extended over an end point of a chord,

For each chord, one of its end points is attractive, while the other one is repulsive.

See Figure [\ref=AltOr].

The first property means that the orientations of arcs induce anonymously an orientation of each end point of each chord. The second property means that for each chord the induced orientations of its end points are opposite to each other.

Orientations of arcs of a chord diagram satisfying these two properties is called an orientation of chord diagram.

Orient chords so that the induced orientations of their end points were opposite to the orientations induced by orientations of adjacent arcs. See Figure [\ref=AltOrCh].

Chords become arrows. Orientations of the arrows alternate in the sense that along the base of the diagram each arrowhead is followed by an arrowtail and each arrowtail is followed by arrowhead.

Observe that an orientation of a chord diagram defines an orientation on the result of any of its smoothings. Indeed, the result of a smoothing is composed from arcs of the base and arcs which go along chords. The orientations of these pieces agree with each other.

Alternatable Virtual Link Diagrams

Observe that directions of arrows in a Gauss diagram of a classical alternating link diagram alternate in the same way as the orientations of chords considered above.

Recall that a classical link diagram is called alternating, if along a branch of the link over-crossing would always follow after under-crossing and under-crossing would always follow after over-crossing.

Similarly, a virtual link is called alternating, if along a branch of the link over-crossing always follow after under-crossing and under-crossing always follow after over-crossing. By switching some overpasses and underpasses, a virtual link diagram such that its blunted Gauss diagram is orientable, can be made alternating. Vice versa, if, by switching some overpasses and underpasses, a virtual link diagram can be made alternating, its blunted Gauss diagram is orientable.

Therefore a virtual link diagram with orientable blunted Gauss diagram is called alternatable.

Moves of Chord Diagrams

Transformations of chord diagram shown in Figure [\ref=RMChD] are called Reidemeister moves.

The result of any first or third Reidemeister move applied to an orientable chord diagram is orientable.

An orientation of a chord diagram prior to the move in the fragment which is about to change is unique up to reversing. Its replacement admits an orientation coinciding with the original one near the boundary. See Figure [\ref=OrOfGDM].

The second Reidemeister move can destroy orientability. Of course, a second Reidemeister move can transform a orientable chord diagram to an orientable one. All second Reidemeister moves decreasing the number of chords and about half of all second Reidemeister moves increasing it which can be applied to a chord diagram preserve orientability. One can easily recognize, if a second Reidemeister move preserves orientability, see Figure [\ref=2OrGDM].

Checkerboard Coloring of a Classical Link Diagram

Let us analyze where the orientation of a chord diagram underlying a Gauss diagram of a classical link comes from.

A generic curve on a plane can be considered as a 1-cycle with coefficients in [formula] on the plane. As a plane has trivial homology, this 1-cycle bounds a 2-chain. The latter is described as the union of all black domains in the checkerboard coloring of the diagram.

Each connected component of the complement of a generic curve inherits an orientation from the whole plane. These orientations of the black domains induce orientations on their boundaries. The boundary of a black domain consists of pieces of the curve. Thus an arc of the curve between any two consecutive double points gets a natural orientation. See Figure [\ref=f1]. It is called a checkerboard orientation.

Obviously, the checkerboard orientation gives orientation of the corresponding chord diagram. The orientation induced by the orientation of chord diagram on the result of a smoothing of the curve can be also obtained as a checkerboard orientation.

Indeed, the result of a smoothing also admits a checkerboard coloring which coincides with the checkerboard coloring of the diagram outside of small neighborhoods of its double points. The orientation induced on the smoothing by the orientations of the black domains agree with the checkerboard orientation of the diagram. See Figure [\ref=OrOfSmooth].

On Orientable Surfaces

The same arguments work for a link diagram zero-homologous modulo two on an oriented surface. An orientable surface with a zero-homologous generically immersed curve admits a checkerboard coloring. We see that:

The chord diagram of a generic curve on an orientable surface admitting a checkerboard coloring is orientable.

A link diagram on an orientable surface admitting a checkerboard coloring is alternatable.

Exponents of monomials in the Kauffman bracket of a checkerboard colorable link diagram on an oriented surface are congruent to each other modulo 4.

It may happen that an alternatable link diagram on an orientable surface does not admit a checkerboard coloring. Indeed, any diagram admitting a checkerboard coloring can be spoiled by a Morse modification of index 1, i.e., removing two disjoint open disks and attaching a tube connecting there boundary circles. For this, take the disks in the complementary domains colored with different colors. Of course, this stabilization of virtual link diagram does not destroy alternatability, which is a property of Gauss diagram.

Nonetheless, according to the following theorem, which is also basically due to Naoko Kamada [\cite=NK], this cannot happen to irreducible diagram.

A generic curve on an orientable surface such that each connected component of its complement is a disk and its chord diagram is orientable admits a checkerboard coloring.

An alternatable link diagram on an orientable surface such that each connected component of its complement is a disk admits a checkerboard coloring.

An orientation of the chord diagram gives rise to an orientation of the boundary of each connected component of the complement of the curve. Since each such component is a disk, the orientation of its boundary orients the component itself. On the other hand, the orientation of the whole surface induces an orientation on each of these components. For some of the components these two orientations coincide, for the others they are opposite to each other. The components for which the orientations coincide form a chain modulo 2 bounded by the curve. By coloring these components in black and the others in white, we get a desired checkerboard coloring of the surface.

The condition about components of the complement can be weakened: instead of requiring that they are homeomorphic to disk, it suffices to require that intersection of the curve with the closure of each of the components is connected.

Alternatable Virtual Links

Recall that a virtual link diagram which gives rise to orientable blunted Gauss diagram is called alternatable.

The result of any first or third Reidemeister move applied to an alternatable virtual link diagram is alternatable.

A second Reidemeister move can turn an alternatable virtual link diagram to a non-alternatable, see Figure [\ref=A2NA].

Moreover, each alternatable virtual diagram can be made non-alternatable by a single second Reidemeister move. Therefore alternatability is not a property shared by all virtual diagrams of a given virtual link.

Alternatable isotopy is a sequence of Reidemeister moves preserving alternatability and virtual moves of an alternatable virtual link diagram.

Alternatable virtual link diagrams are virtualy isotopic, iff they can be related by an alternatable isotopy.

Let D1 and D2 be virtually isotopic alternatable link diagrams. Realize each of them as a diagram admitting a checkerboard coloring on an oriented closed surface.

According to the Kuperberg Theorem [\cite=Kup], virtually isotopic link diagrams can be destabilized to link diagrams on an oriented surface S, where they can be related by embedded moves. A destabilization consists of embedded Reidemeister moves and Morse modifications of index 2 of the ambient surface along a circle disjoint with the diagram.

Neither an embedded Reidemeister move, nor Morse modification of index two can destroy a checkerboard coloring. A Morse modification of index two does not change the Gauss diagram. Therefore the sequence of moves connecting the Gauss diagrams corresponding to D1 and D2 which correspond to the Reidemeister moves existing by the Kuperberg Theorem constitute an alternatable isotopy.

Thus alternatable virtual links do not form a new category of objects similar to virtual links, but are virtual links of special kind. They have special properties. For example, the exponents of Kauffman bracket are congruent to each other modulo 4, see the second Corollary of Theorem [\ref=T1] above. From the point of view of 3-dimensional topology, they can be characterized as irreducible links in thickened oriented surfaces which realize trivial homology class modulo 2.

On a Non-Orientable Surface

Theorem [\ref=T1] and its corollary cannot be extended literally to twisted link diagrams on non-orientable surfaces . For example, link 21 on the projective plane has checkerboard colorable diagram, but its Kauffman bracket is A- 4 + A- 6 - A- 10, see [\cite=D2].

However, a generalization recovers, if the property of being zero-homologous modulo two is generalized in other way.

The chord diagram of a generic curve realizing the homology class dual to the first Stiefel-Whitney class of the surface is orientable.

Let C be a generic curve on a surface S and realizing a homology class dual to [formula]. The complement [formula] admits an orientation which cannot be extended over C at any point. Each arc of C is involved in C with multiplicity two in the boundary of the corresponding fundamental class

[formula]

.

[formula]

Exponents of monomials in the Kauffman bracket of a link non-zero-homologous in the real projective space are congruent to each other modulo 4.

If the chord diagram of a generic curve on a surface is orientable and each connected component of its complement on the surface is a disk then the curve realizes the homology class dual to the first Stiefel-Whitney class of the surface.

An orientation of the chord diagram gives rise to an orientation of the boundary of each connected component of the complement of the curve. Since each such component is a disk, the orientation of its boundary orients the component itself.

The orientations of the components of complement form an orientation of whole complement, which does not extend over the curve, because from both sides of the curve it induces the same orientation on each piece of the curve. Therefore the curve realizes the obstruction to orientability of the surface.

Obstruction to Orientability of Chord Diagram

Near each chord of a chord diagram an orientation of the diagram looks standard, up to simultaneous reversing. For any choice of the orientation, on each arc of the base either the orientations at the end points extend to the whole arc, or not. Thus for any choice of orientations of chords there is a well defined [formula]-valued function of the set of arcs of the base. It can be considered as a 1-cochain with values in [formula] on the chord diagram. Reversing of a single chord's orientation causes change of values on each of the four adjacent arcs.

This means that there is a well-defined one-dimensional cohomology class with values in [formula] of the underlying space of the chord diagram (the union of the base and chords). This class is zero, iff the diagram is orientable. Therefore we call it the obstruction to orientability.

The class is defined by topology of the pair consisting of the underlying space and the union of all chords. It is not defined by the homotopy type of the underlying space, although it belongs to a cohomology group depending only on the homotopy type. It is not defined by the topology of the four-valent graph obtained by contracting each of the chords, either. Indeed, it depends on division of arcs adjacent to a vertex to pairs of opposite arcs, that is arcs adjacent to one end point of the chord in the underlying space of the chord diagram.

The simplest example is a circle with two chords intersecting each other, on one hand, and two circles connected with two chords, on the other hand. The quotient four-valent graphs are homeomorphic.

Khovanov Homology of Oriented Signed Chord Diagrams

Khovanov Homology of Classical Links

In 1998 Khovanov [\cite=Kh] categorified Jones polynomial. His construction is a refinement of the Kauffman bracket construction. To any classical link diagram D it associates a bigraded chain complex of abelian groups Ci,j(D) with differential d:Ci,j(D)  →  Ci + 1,j(D) and homology groups Hi,j(D) such that Reidemeister moves of the diagram induce homotopy equivalences of the complex. The Khovanov homology Hi,j(D) categorifies the Jones polynomial fD(A) in the sense that

[formula]

This slightly strange formula is due to the fact that Khovanov used different normalization of the Jones polynomial, namely [formula]. Ranks of the Khovanov homology groups are related to K as follows:

[formula]

For any state s of D, the construction associates to each connected component C of Ds a copy C of graded free abelian group [formula] with two generators, 1 of grading 1 and x of grading -1. To the whole s the construction associates a graded group C(s) which is the tensor product of all copies c of [formula] associated to the connected components of Ds with grading shifted by [formula], where w(D) is the writhe of D.

For a state s of diagram D denote [formula] by i(s) and consider C(s) as a bigraded group with first grading to be identically equal to i(s) and the second grading as defined above (i.e., the grading of tensor product shifted by [formula]). Denote by [formula] the bigraded group [formula]. This is the total group of the Khovanov chain complex.

To define differential, we need to fix an order of all crossings of the diagram. We need to fix also multiplication m: defined by formulas [formula], [formula], [formula] and [formula], and comultiplication Δ: defined by formulas [formula] and [formula].

The differential Ci,j  →  Ci + 1,j is defined as the sum of partial differentials Cj(s)  →  Cj(t), where s and t are states with i(s) = i, i(t) = i + 1 such that t differs from s only by a marker at one crossing. Denote this crossing by x and its number by k. Denote by r the number of negative markers of s at crossings with numbers greater than k. At x the marker of s is positive, while the marker of t is negative.

Let two connected components of Ds pass near x. Denote them by C1 and C2. Then there is only one connected component of Dt passing near x. Denote this component by C. Then [formula] and [formula] and the partial differential C(s)  →  C(t) is defined by formula [formula].

Let only one component of Ds pass near x. Denote it by C. Then two components of Dt pass near x. Denote them by DC1 and DC2. Then [formula] and [formula] and the partial differential C(s)  →  C(t) is defined by formula [formula].

Khovanov Complex of Oriented Signed Chord Diagram

It is clear that the construction of Khovanov complex sketched above can be expressed completely in terms of signed chord diagram, as it was done with the Kauffman bracket in Section [\ref=s3.2].

If a signed chord diagram is orientable, all properties of its Khovanov complexes proven in [\cite=Kh] or [\cite=BN] can be repeated without any change. In particular, this is a complex. The only property of classical link diagrams that is used in the proof of this is that change of a single marker in a state s gives rise to change of the number of connected components in Ds, and this is a corollary of orientability of the chord diagram.

Further, the Reidemeister moves of signed chord diagram induce homotopy equivalences of the Khovanov complex, provided they preserve an orientation. The proof is also borrowed from the classical case without any change.

According to Theorem [\ref=4.7.B], if alternatable virtual diagrams are virtualy isotopic then they can be related by an alternatable isotopy. Therefore, the homotopy type of the Khovanov complex and, in particular, Khovanov homology groups are invariants of alternatable virtual links.

Failure in Non-Orientable Case

If the signed chord diagram is not orientable, there is no problem to extend the definition of differential, because the partial differentials along a change of marker destroying orientation of Ds and hence preserving the number of components vanish for grading reasons.

Indeed, C(s) is obtained from |s| by a shift of the second grading by [formula]. The graded rank of C(s) is [formula]. All exponents of this graded rank are congruent to each other modulo 2. When a(s) and b(s) change by one and |s| does not change, the graded rank is multiplied by q, and parity of all exponents changes by 1. Thus any homomorphism preserving the grading is trivial.

However, the homomorphism   →   obtained in this way is not a differential: its square is not zero. This can be easily seen in the very simple example.

The unknot in [formula] is isotopic to [formula]. The corresponding virtual link diagram is shown on the right hand side of Figure [\ref=A2NA].

Consider the Khovanov chain groups. There are 4 states giving rise to Khovanov chain groups which looks as follows:

[formula]

Here the graded ranks are shown as exponents. For the grading reasons (the partial differentials are of degree 0), the upper arrows should be zero. Therefore the composition of the bottom two arrows should be zero. Otherwise the square of the differential would not be zero.

But it is non-trivial in the component with grading 0. Indeed, the first of them maps 1 to [formula], then the second one maps [formula] to [formula] and [formula] to x. Hence the composition sends 1 to 2x.