Turbulence: A Probe of the Dynamics and Physics of the Magellanic Stream

Introduction

In a recent paper Stanimirovi  (2008) present quit interesting results from HI observations of the tip of the Magellanic Stream (MS) . The high spatial resolution of the data obtained by Stanimirovi  (2008), reveals rich and complex morphological and kinematic structures. The authors find four coherent HI substreams in the tip of the MS extending over projected angular size of about 20o. Three of the these streams (S2, S3, S4) originate from about the same location and are clumpy. The remaining, S1 stream, seems more diffuse and doesn't share the common location of the former streams. In all streams, the kinematic data show large scale velocity gradients of ~  (5 - 10)km s -  1  deg  -  1.

By comparing the observations to the simulations of Connors  (2006), Stanimirovi  (2008), interpret the three former streams to be the result of the tidal splitting of the main MS by tidal interaction of the LMC and the MS about 1.05 Gyr and 0.55 Gyr ago. In this picture, the MS stream itself was formed about 1.5 Gyr ago by close tidal encounter of the SMC, LMC and the Milky Way (MW).

The S1 sub-stream, is interpreted to have formed much more recently, about 0.2 Gyr ago, and consists of gas drawn from the Magellanic Bridge. Contrary to the former three streams, it had not enough time to cool and fragment.

Present Work

The tidal interactions assumed to create the streams, generate large scale shear flows, as indeed is evident in the data of Stanimirovi  (2008). These, in turn, are bound to create turbulence in the ISM by several instabilities. Turbulence can be created also by shocks via the Richtmeir-Meshkov instability. The ultimate energy source for all these instabilities are the tidal interactions. The result is a large scale turbulence of size comparable to the entire size of the system. Furtheremore, if the decay time of the turbulence turns out to exceed the age of the system, the turbulence can serve as a "fossil evidence" that can supply valuable information. For more details on these issues see Goldman (2000, 2007).

In the present work we analyze the position-velocity images along the streams, derived by Stanimirovi  (2008). For each stream, we fitted a mean velocity field consisting of a constant plus a gradient. This mean velocity field was substracted from the observed velocity, yielding the residual velocity field, as function of projected angle.

We derived the spatial power spectrum for the residual velocity field of each stream. The results are shown in Figure 1. The power spectrum for each stream is a power law that indicates the presence of an underlying statistical order that reflects correlations between the fluctuations on different scales. Such a power law is a signature of the inertial range of wavenumbers of a turbulent velocity field.

The turbulence for all streams encompasses the total extent of the the stream. Such a large scale turbulence can not be generated by a localized source such as supernovae winds. A large scale source with scale at least at that of the stream is required. Tidal interactions is the natural candidate.

The residual velocity fields originate from integration along the line of sight. For scales in the plane of the sky, that are large compared to the depth along the line of sight, the index of the power spectrum power law, equals the index of the turbulent energy spectral function. For scales in the plane of the sky, that are small compared to the depth along the line of sight, the index of the power spectrum power law, equals the index of the turbulent energy spectral function minus 1.

For S2 and S4, the power spectrum can be fitted by a single power law with index ~   - 3. This corresponds to a turbulence energy spectral function [formula] which is the inertial range for compressible turbulence, when the depth over which the velocity was integrated, is larger than the scale in the plane of the sky.

For S1 and S3 there is an indication that the power spectrum changes from a power law with index ~   - 2 to a power law with index ~   - 3 at a relative wavenumber of ~  4 - 5 . This implies that the depth of these streams is about 40. The r.m.s turbulent velocity for all the streams is similar: ~  15 kms -  1 namely mildly supersonic. This is consistent with the - 2 index of the turbulence energy spectral function.

Discussion

The main results of the present work are:

Each of the streams exhibits a large scale turbulence comparable to the size of the stream. This provides dynamical proof that the streams are coherent structures, as stated in Stanimirovi  (2008).

For an assumed distance of 120 kpc to the MS tip, the projected size of the stream and the largest turbulence scale is ~  40 kpc.

The turbulent r.m.s velocity on the largest scale is about 15 kms -  1, namely mildly supersonic. This is in line with the inertial range index of the turbulent spectral energy function being - 2 instead of the Kolmogorov value - 5 / 3, appropriate for subsonic turbulence.

The resulting timescale for decay of the turbulence is about 3 Gyr and is longer than the age of the MS, thus providing "fossil evidence".

The fact that a break in the power spectrum is evident in S1, and even more so in S3 indicates that the inclination angle of these stream, with respect to the line of sight is not large; they are viewed almost face-on.

The absence of a clear break in the power spectra of S2 and S4, suggest that their inclination is larger. Taking the absence of the break to imply that the projected depth is larger than about 80 and assuming that the true depth is 40, as deduced for S2 and S4, results in an inclination of ~  600. From Fig. 6 of Connors  (2006) one can deduce a similar inclination at the tip of the MS.

A depth of 40 at a distance of 120 kpc corresponds to a physical depth of a 8 kpc. For column densities in the range (1 - 10)  ×  1019cm -  2 this implies a depth-averaged density of the warm neutral medium: nWNM  =  (0.3 - 3)  ×  10- 3cm -  3.