Tsemo Aristide

University of Toronto

St. George Street

Toronto, Ontario Canada

M5S 3G3

tsemo58@yahoo.ca

The structure of CR manifolds.

Abstract.

In this paper we study the topology of CR pseudoconvex manifolds whose Reeb flow preserve the Levi metric.

Definition 1.

A CR-manifold of dimension 2n + 1 is a manifold N of dimension 2n + 1 endowed with the followings properties:

Let TN be the tangent bundle of N, there exists a subbundle V of [formula], of complex dimension n. such that [formula], where [formula] is the complex conjugate of V, and ⊂  V.

The bundle [formula] is the kernel of a real 1-form θ∈T*N, where T*N is the cotangent bundle of N.

Let (Up)p∈I be an open contractible covering of N by open subsets. We denote by θp the restriction of θ to Up, and (up1,...,upn) a basis of the restriction of the dual of V to U, we have:

[formula]

The coefficients hcd, define a pseudo-Hermitian metric on V. We can extend this metric to H by supposing that V is orthogonal to [formula], and the complex conjugate is an isometry. This metric is called the Levi metric.

Definition 2.

The CR-manifold is pseudo convex if the Levi metric is positive definite. In this case there exists a vector field X of TN such that LXθ = 0, where LX is the Lie derivative. The vector field X is called the Reeb vector field.

The purpose of this paper is to show the following result:

Theorem 1.

Let N be a compact pseudo-convex CR manifold, X a flow transverse to H which preserves the Levi metric then the closure of the orbits of X are torus, if these closure have the same dimension, then N is the total space of a bundle whose typical fiber is the closure of an orbit of X flow over a Satake manifold.

The complex transverse geometry of the Reeb flow.

Let N be a CR pseudo-convex manifold, and X a flow transverse to H which preserves the Levi metric. The complex transverse bundle TXN of X is the quotient of [formula] by [formula]. Let U be a contractible open subset of N, and T a submanifold of U transverse to X. We denote by LXNU, the restriction of the bundle of complex frames LXN of TXN to U, we have a projection [formula], where LT is the bundle of transverse complex frames of T. The kernel of the differential dpU of dP define on LXNU a distribution tangent to a flow. This distribution is independent of the choice of the local transversal T. We have thus defined on LXN a flow X̂, which is called the lift of X.

The Levi metric < , > , defines an Hermitian reduction HX of LXN (which is invariant by the orbit of X̂) of LXN, since the manifold N is compact, HX is also a compact submanifold. To show the theorem 1, we shall prove that the restriction X' of X̂ to HX is a riemaniann flow, (in fact, we are going to construct a transverse parallelism to X') and apply a well-known result of Yves Carriere on the structure of Riemannian flows.

The transverse parallelism of X'.

The manifold HX is a principal bundle over N whose typical fiber is U(2n), the group of Hermitian matrices. Each element c of the Lie algebra u(2n) of U(2n) defines on HX a vector field cN defined by [formula]. The vector cN are called the fundamental vector fields of HX

Let α be the fundamental form of HX. Recall that for every element u of the tangent space THXx of x∈THx (x is a linear map [formula], where p:HX  →  N is the bundle projection map, α(u) = x- 1(dpx(u)). For each element y of I  C2n, we can define the vector field ŷ of HX by setting α(ŷ) = y.

The vector ŷ, y∈I  C2n and the fundamental vector fields define the transverse parallelism to X'.

Proof of theorem 1.

Let X be an isometry transverse to the Levi metric, then the lift X' of X to HX is a riemannian flow, we can apply the result of Carriere. The closure of the orbits of X are the projections of the closure of the orbits of X' by the bundle map HX  →  N.

We can obtain this most general result:

Theorem 2.

Let N be a pseudo convex compact CR manifold, endowed with a transverse flow X which is a conformal flow in respect to the Levi metric, then the closure of the orbits of X are torus.

Proof.

Consider the group generated by U(n) and the complex homothetic maps, and we denote L(n), its quotient by an homothetic map hλ0 such that the norm of λ0 is strictly superior to 1. The transverse bundle of X can be reduced to L(n). The lifts X' of X to L(n) is a transverselly conformal analytic flow of codimension greater than 3. We can apply the theorem of Tarquini which asserts that in this situation that the flow of X' is riemannian or Moebius. Then we apply the structure theorem for riemannian flows and Moebius flows.

The previous result suggests the study of transversely Hermitian foliations:

Definition 3.

Let N be a manifold, and H a foliation defined on N, the foliation H is a transversely Hermitian foliation, if there exists a symmetric Hermitian basic 2-tensor < , >  defined on [formula] such that:

For each u∈N, [formula] the tensor product of the subspace TxH of TuN tangent to H and I  C is the kernel of < , > .

The projection of < , >  to the transverse complex bundle of H is a positive definite Hermitian metric. We have the following nice result:

Theorem 3.

Let N be a compact manifold endowed with a transversely Hermitian foliation H, then the closure of the leaves of H are submanifolds.

References.

1. Yves Carriere, Flots riemanniens Asterisque 116

2. Tarquini, Feuilletages conformes, Annales Institut Fourier 2004