On-chip Inter-modal Brillouin Scattering

Introduction

Stimulated Brillouin scattering (SBS) is a three-wave nonlinear process that produces coherent coupling between optical waves and acoustic phonons. Within waveguides, Brillouin interactions are remarkably tailorable, permitting a range of hybrid photonic-phononic signal processing operations that have no analogue in all-optical signal processing . Strong Brillouin interactions have only recently been created in silicon using a new class of optomechanical waveguides that produce record-high nonlinearities and admit intriguing dynamics as a basis for a variety of novel devices . Further control of such Brillouin processes could enable phenomena such as mode cooling and nonreciprocal Brillouin scattering-induced transparency , and lead to new lasers, oscillators, filters , frequency sources , and signal processing technologies in silicon.

Many different types of Brillouin interactions are possible within microscale waveguides and devices, each producing a distinct set of phenomena. To date, strong forward stimulated Brillouin scattering (FSBS), also termed stimulated Raman-like scattering (SRLS) , has been achieved within silicon waveguides . Through FSBS, phonons mediate coupling between co-propagating light fields that are guided in the same optical mode. This interaction produces very strong optical nonlinearities (104 - 105 larger than in silica fibers) , enabling large net amplification and cascaded energy transfer. This interaction also produces dynamics that are very different than those of the widely studied backward-SBS (BSBS) interaction {[\cite=agrawal2007nonlinear], offering intriguing opportunities for new processes and phenomena. For example, FSBS is uniquely suited to hybrid photonic-phononic signal processing schemes based on phonon emit/receive operations that have recently been realized in silicon {[\cite=shinpper]. However, unlike BSBS, FSBS does not produce single-sideband gain. As a result, it is nontrivial in many cases to adapt BSBS device concepts and established techniques for signal processing , slow light, and filtering {[\cite=Tanemura02] [\cite=Zadok07] [\cite=Vidal07] [\cite=Wise11] [\cite=zhang12] using FSBS interactions.

Alternatively, within multi-mode optomechanical waveguides it is also possible to create phonon-mediated coupling between light-fields guided in distinct spatial modes. This interaction, termed stimulated inter-modal Brillouin scattering (SIMS), creates an unusual symmetry-breaking between Stokes and anti-Stokes processes for forward-propagating waves. This form of symmetry breaking produces single-sideband gain while offering powerful new dynamics that enable a variety of unique operation schemes. SIMS and SIMS-like processes have recently been demonstrated in photonic crystal and nanoweb fibers , admitting new physics compatible with both established technologies based on BSBS as well as many novel optical devices. Fiber experiments have used SIMS processes to create single-sideband amplification , self oscillation , and active optical isolation , with dynamics that permit near-unity energy transfer between pump and signal waves . Inter-modal scattering in microsphere resonators permits attractive schemes for optical cooling , Brillouin scattering-induced transparency and nonreciprocal energy storage. All of these processes, and many others become available on a silicon chip if engineerable forms of SIMS can be created.

In this paper, we demonstrate efficient and highly engineerable stimulated inter-modal Brillouin coupling on-chip for the first time. Through this process, a Brillouin interaction couples light fields that propagate in distinct spatial modes of a Brillouin-active silicon waveguide. This system decouples Stokes and anti-Stokes processes through symmetry breaking based on multimode dispersion. Harnessing this interaction, we demonstrate single-sideband optical amplification and unidirectional Brillouin energy transfer for the first time in silicon. Combining this novel form of Brillouin coupling with on-chip spatial mode-multiplexers offers a powerful new approach to Brillouin-based signal processing in silicon.

This interaction is realized in a novel integrated photonic/phononic waveguide system that permits net optical amplification and single-sideband energy transfer between two strong optical fields. Strong nonlinear coupling enables 3.5 dB of single-sideband small-signal gain, corresponding to 2.3 dB of net on-chip amplification in this low-propagation loss system. Pump- and signal-waves are coupled in and out of separate optical modes of a single Brillouin-active silicon waveguide using integrated mode multiplexers. This enables independent on-chip control of pump- and signal-waves without additional optical components such as isolators or narrowband filters. At higher guided-wave powers, this same device produces 50% energy transfer between these two fields to produce stimulated mode conversion. Due to the inherent symmetry breaking of the inter-modal coupling, only two fields participate in this process, theoretically permitting near-unity power transfer between optical fields. This contrasts with FSBS-based energy transfer, where the amount of power transferred from one tone to another is fundamentally limited by stimulated comb-line generation. The realization of highly-engineerable SIMS in silicon unlocks a new platform for Brillouin interactions in silicon photonic systems.

The unique physics of SIMS result from a form of coupling between phonons and light that differs from that of FSBS. Through FSBS, both Stokes and anti-Stokes scattering processes are mediated by the same phonon mode. Furthermore, the phase-matching condition for FSBS allows the same phonon to scatter light to many successive blue- and red-shifted orders . By contrast, phase-matching for SIMS coupling to different optical modes requires that Stokes and anti-Stokes processes are mediated by distinct phonon modes. As a result, the dynamics of these processes become de-coupled, permitting single-sideband amplification as well as a variety of processes unique to inter-modal scattering .

Operation Scheme

We explore stimulated mode conversion and single-sideband amplification using the multi-port optomechanical system diagrammed in Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]a. This system consists of a multi-mode hybrid photonic-phononic waveguide that is interfaced with two integrated mode multiplexers labeled M1 and M2.

We consider the interaction between two guided optical modes [formula] and [formula] and a Brillouin-active acoustic phonon mode [formula], as sketched in [\ref=fig:xsbs]b. Here [formula] and kj(ω) are the electric field profile and wave-vector of the jth optical mode at frequency ω, and [formula] and q(Ω) are the elastic displacement field profile and wavevector of the acoustic mode at frequency Ω.

Each port of the optical mode multiplexers, denoted as M1 and M2 in Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]c, maps to a distinct spatial mode as shown in Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]b. In the absence of nonlinear coupling, light injected into port 1 of M1 propagates in the symmetric mode [formula] of the optomechanical waveguide, exiting the system in port 1 of M2. Similarly, light entering port 2 of M1 propagates in the anti-symmetric mode [formula] of the waveguide, exiting the system in port 2 of M2. However, when pump- and signal-waves are injected into ports 1 and 2, respectively, resonant nonlinear coupling to the Brillouin-active phonon mode [formula] scatters energy from the symmetric mode [formula] to the anti-symmetric mode [formula], producing both active mode conversion and single-sideband signal amplification.

This stimulated scattering process is driven by optical forces within the optomechanical waveguide segment. The pump wave [formula] interferes with the signal wave [formula] to produce a time-modulated optical force that excites a traveling-wave phonon [formula] which in turn scatters energy from pump to signal. This process, which is a type of stimulated inter-modal Brillouin scattering (SIMS), produces amplification and mode conversion through a stimulated Stokes process. In contrast to FSBS processes that have previously been demonstrated in silicon waveguides , this process also produces single-sideband amplification and unique forward scattering wave dynamics as a basis for new types of nonreciprocal devices .

Single-sideband amplification is possible in this system because the Stokes and anti-Stokes processes are no longer mediated by the same phonon mode. This is understood from the distinct phase matching conditions for these processes. Through the Stokes process, diagrammed in Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]g, a pump photon (ωp, k1(ωp)) guided in the symmetric mode [formula] scatters to a red-shifted photon (ωs, k2(ωs)) guided in the anti-symmetric mode [formula], and a guided Stokes phonon (Ωs, qs). For this process to occur, both energy conservation (Ωs  =  ωp  -  ωs) and phase-matching (qs  =  k(ωp) - k(ωs)) must be satisfied. Combined, these conditions require qs  =  k1(ωp) - k2(ωp  -  Ωs). We use this condition as the basis for a succinct diagrammatic representation that includes both phase matching and energy conservation, as seen in Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]d. A phonon that satisfies this condition must lie along the acoustic dispersion curve, q(Ω) sketched in Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]f. This phase-matched phonon, which connects the initial (open circle) and final optical states (solid circle) sketched in Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]d, is a forward moving phonon.

Through the anti-Stokes process, diagrammed in Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]h, the same pump photon (ωp, k1(ωp)) combines with a guided phonon (Ωas, qas) to produce a blue shifted photon (ωas, k2(ωas)). In this case, phase matching and energy conservation require qas  =  k1(ωp  +  Ωas) - k2(ωp), which differs from the Stokes process. As seen from Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]e, the anti-Stokes phonon that connects the initial optical state (open circle) and final optical state (solid circle) is a backward moving phonon.

Since the Stokes and anti-Stokes phonons are distinct (i.e., qs  ≠  qas) symmetry is broken between the two processes. As a result, the dynamics for the Stokes and anti-Stokes processes are de-coupled, permitting unidirectional single-sideband coupling between only two optical fields. (for further discussion see Supplementary Section S4.)

Results

This multi-port optomechanical system is fabricated from a single-crystal silicon layer using an SOI fabrication process (for details see Methods). The spatial mode multiplexers M1 and M2 address the individual modes of the optomechanical waveguide, and are fabricated on the same layer as the Brillouin-active waveguide segment. These mode multiplexers utilize asymmetric mode-selective directional couplers adapted to the low-loss ridge waveguide designs used here (see Supplementary Section S3 for details). Fiber arrays and grating couplers transfer light into single mode waveguides, which serve as the input- and output-ports of M1 and M2.

The Brillouin-active waveguide segment that supports stimulated inter-modal coupling is a suspended ridge waveguide of the type depicted in Fig. [\ref=fig:device]a. Scanning electron micro-graphs (SEMs) show the cross-section (Fig. [\ref=fig:device]b) and top-view (Fig. [\ref=fig:device]c) of the crystalline silicon device. The Brillouin-active waveguide is suspended over a 2.3 cm distance by an array of nanoscale tethers placed every 50 [formula]m (see Fig. [\ref=fig:device]c). The active region consists of a 80 nm ×   1.5 [formula]m wide ridge on a 135 nm thick silicon membrane of width w  =  2.85 [formula]m. The cross-section of the active device region, highlighted in Fig. [\ref=fig:device]d, is diagrammed in Fig. [\ref=fig:device]e.

Both light and sound are guided within the membrane-suspended waveguide of Fig. [\ref=fig:device]e. Light is confined to the central ridge structure through total internal reflection, which guides the co-propagating TE-like optical modes. The symmetric [formula] and anti-symmetric [formula] spatial modes are plotted in Fig. [\ref=fig:device]f-g at a wavelength of λ = 1550 nm. Elastic waves are confined to this same structure due to the large acoustic impedance mismatch between silicon and air.

This system supports numerous guided elastic waves with longitudinal, shear, and flexural character. Of these, only a small number are Brillouin-active and mediate transfer of energy between modes [formula] and [formula]. In addition to phase matching, Brillouin coupling requires appreciable overlap between optical force density, produced by the interference between [formula] and [formula], and the elastic displacement field. One such Brillouin active phonon mode that produces strong inter-modal Brillouin coupling at 6 GHz frequencies is shown in Figs. [\ref=fig:device]i and [\ref=fig:device]l. Figure [\ref=fig:device]i shows the dominant (x-component) of elastic displacement field ([formula]) within the waveguide cross-section, and Figure [\ref=fig:device]l is a top-view showing elastic distortion of this same mode. Comparing the electrostrictive optical force distribution of Fig. [\ref=fig:device]h, with Fig. [\ref=fig:device]i, we see that the transverse displacement produces good overlap with the optical forces to mediate coupling.

Stimulated Inter-Modal Scattering

We examine the inter-modal Brillouin response of this system using nonlinear laser spectroscopy. The stimulated inter-modal Brillouin scattering spectrum is obtained by measuring phonon-mediated energy transfer between the symmetric and anti-symmetric optical modes of the Brillouin active waveguide segment. A strong pump-wave (ωp) and weak signal-wave (ωs  =  ωp  -  Ω) enter the symmetric ([formula]) and anti-symmetric ([formula]) waveguide modes through ports 1 and 2 of mode multiplexer M1, respectively; power guided in these same modes exit ports 1 and 2 of multiplexer M2. As the pump-probe detuning (Ω) is swept through resonance, Brillouin coupling produces energy transfer between pump- and probe-waves propagating in the symmetric and anti-symmetric modes, yielding the resonant features seen in the gain spectrum Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]b; throughout this article, we refer to the relative change in the probe intensity as the Brillouin gain.

These Brillouin gain measurements are conducted using the apparatus of Fig [\ref=fig:ssb]a. Both the pump- and probe-waves are synthesized from the same continuous-wave laser. The laser output (ωp) is amplified using an erbium doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) to form the pump-wave. A single frequency probe-wave (ωp  -  Ω) is synthesized from the same laser output using an electrically driven intensity modulator and an optical notch filter as seen in Fig.[\ref=fig:ssb]a. The frequency separation, Ω, between the pump- and probe-waves is controlled with sub-Hertz precision using a microwave signal generator. Since the probe wave is kept to <  200 [formula]W, pump depletion is negligible.

At the device output, the optical waves exiting port 2 of M2 of the chip are analyzed using wideband heterodyne spectral analysis. As shown in Fig [\ref=fig:ssb]a, signal-light exiting port 2 is combined with an optical local oscillator (ωp  +  ΔAOM) generated by frequency shifting the laser output. As the signal and local oscillator interfere, the intensity of each tone within the signal-wave is observed as a unique beat-note using a fast photodiode and a spectrum analyzer. The Brillouin gain spectrum of Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]b is obtained by measuring the power contained in the output probe-wave at frequency ωp  -  Ω, as the pump-probe detuning Ω is varied from 500 MHz to 9.5 GHz (for more details see Supplementary Section S2).

The frequencies of the identified Brillouin-active phonon modes, labeled B1-9 in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]b, show good agreement with frequencies predicted through multi-physics simulations (denoted by violet circles along the abscissa). The phononic dispersion curves (computed based on measured device dimensions) for each of the Brillouin-active phonon modes are highlighted in Fig [\ref=fig:ssb]c. Phase-matched coupling occurs where the phonon wave-vector (qm(Ω)) of the mth Brillouin-active dispersion curve matches the optical wave-vector mismatch, Δk(Ω) = k1(ωp) - k2(ωp  -  Ω); these frequencies are identified by the intersection between the phonon dispersion curves and the vertical line (grey) (for further details on the acoustic modes of this system, see Supplementary Section S7).

The gain spectrum (Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]b) reveals dominant Brillouin resonances, labeled B1, B3, and B6, corresponding to Brillouin-active phonon modes with frequencies of 1.18, 3.09, and 6.03 GHz. Insets within Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]c illustrate the dominant displacement character of each mode. The simulated coupling strengths, obtained through full-vectorial finite element simulations of the type described in Ref. , produce good agreement with the observed Brillouin nonlinearity of each mode; these simulations reveal that the interaction is primarily mediated by photoelasticity.

Dispersive Symmetry Breaking

Next we examine stimulated inter-modal Brillouin dynamics through both gain and nonlinear power transfer measurements; throughout these studies, we study these dynamics using the 6.03 GHz resonance that exhibits the largest Brillouin gain-this resonance is labeled B6 in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]b. A key characteristic of SIMS through coupling to these phonon modes is single-sideband gain. To investigate these dynamics, we perform power dependent spectral analysis of the probe signal exiting port 2 of M2 as we vary the pump wave power. Figure [\ref=fig:ssb]d, shows the spectral content of the transmitted waves obtained through heterodyne measurements when pump and probe light is coupled through the Brillouin-active mode. When the probe detuning is set to the Brillouin resonance frequency and the pump power is varied, we observe single-sideband gain, plotted in the rightmost inset of Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]b. Here the measured Stokes (red dots) and anti-Stokes (purple dots) powers are shown as a function of pump power. In contrast to FSBS processes, as the pump power is increased from 0 to 70 mW and the Stokes (red-shifted) sideband experiences gain, no light is scattered to the anti-Stokes order (for further discussion see Supplementary Section S4).

These measurements establish that this inter-modal coupling produces the predicted dispersive symmetry breaking necessary to enable single-sideband gain and support existing schemes for slow light and Brillouin-based optical memory . Next, we show that this system produces net optical amplification, necessary to support new laser geometries and robust integrated photonic performance; a similar figure of merit is required for efficient Brillouin-scattering induced transparency .

Single-Sideband Amplification

Net on-chip optical amplification requires that the Brillouin gain exceeds both linear and nonlinear propagation losses. To quantify total inter-modal gain and net optical amplification, we perform power-dependent measurements of the gain and loss experienced by the probe wave. Using the experiment diagrammed in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]a, the pump-probe detuning Ω is swept through the Brillouin frequency ΩS to measure the resonant Brillouin gain spectrum. Three such SIMS gain spectra, for incident on-chip fundamental-mode pump-wave powers of 13, 43, and 88 mW, respectively, are shown in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]d.i-iii. These data show a high-quality factor (Q  =  ΩS  /  ΔΩ  =  460) Brillouin resonance at ΩS  =  6.03 GHz and 3.5 dB of Brillouin gain at the highest tested pump powers. Peak gain vs. pump power, as well as measured linear and nonlinear loss, are plotted in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]e. Net optical amplification, calculated by subtracting total loss from Brillouin gain, is plotted in Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]f. 2.3 dB of amplification is achieved at the highest tested pump power of 88 mW. These data are fit to a complete nonlinear Brillouin gain model to obtain a Brillouin gain coefficient of GB  =  470  ±  30 W- 1m- 1. The measured gain and frequency agree well with simulated values of GB  =  410  ±  70 W- 1m- 1 and ΩS  =  6.07 GHz for this w  =  2.85 [formula]m device.

The SIMS process can also be pumped in the higher-order mode and amplify light in the fundamental mode-data for four different pump-probe configurations are plotted in Supplementary Section S6.

Significant Brillouin-based optical amplification in silicon relies on low optical propagation losses and large Brillouin gain. In this waveguide system, linear losses were determined through length-dependent ring-resonator finesse measurements and nonlinear losses were measured through power-dependent transmission measurements (for full details see Supplementary Section S2). Due to reduced spatial overlap between the waveguide modes, nonlinear losses impacting SIMS are 40-70% lower than those for intra-modal scattering, resulting in lower power-dependent losses than those in the FSBS system of Ref. {[\cite=Kittlaus2016]. This is important as it permits low-threshold amplification and robust operation at high pump powers. Greatly reduced fifth-order losses due to free carrier effects, in particular, are necessary to support high-power laser designs.

Inter-Modal Energy Transfer

Strong inter-modal Brillouin coupling permits significant nonlinear power transfer between optical fields and may enable new on-chip optical devices. These dynamics have previously been observed only in highly-nonlinear photonic crystal fiber, where light is scattered between distinct polarization states . This interaction was used as the basis for new forms of active optical isolators . The operation scheme of this active isolator system was made possible through the use of polarization multiplexing which behaves analogously to on-chip mode multiplexing.

In principle, SIMS processes of the type realized here can enable similar forms of nonreciprocal optical devices including circulators and switches on a silicon chip. To explore the possibility of such operations in an integrated photonic platform, we quantify nonlinear energy transfer in the large-signal regime (i.e. where significant energy transfer occurs).

We quantify inter-modal Brillouin energy transfer in the large-signal regime using the apparatus of Fig [\ref=fig:ssb]a; here, an additional EDFA (labeled EDFA2) is introduced to boost the probe wave intensity. Pump- and probe-waves of equal intensity are injected into modes [formula] and [formula] of the Brillouin-active waveguide, respectively, with pump-probe frequency detuning (Ω) equal to the Brillouin resonance frequency of 6.03 GHz. As the pump and probe waves propagate within the active device region, the pump wave [formula] is scattered into mode [formula] causing pump depletion and probe-wave gain. As before, pump and probe waves enter and exit the active device region through optical mode multiplexers M1 and M2.

Fig. [\ref=fig:et]b plots energy transfer data as a function of combined incident power, with a maximum of 75 mW in both pump and probe waves, for a device with width w  =  2.77 [formula]m and nonlinear coefficient GB  =  420  ±  20 W- 1m- 1. At the highest tested powers, 50% energy transfer from pump to Stokes is demonstrated. In principle, energy transfer efficiencies approaching 100% are possible with either a longer Brillouin-active region or higher pump power .

These results demonstrate a dramatically different regime of operation from the small signal-gain limit. In contrast to the undepleted pump regime, a significant fraction (many tens of milliwatts) of power is transferred between the participating optical fields. This result also highlights the high power-handling of the unclad silicon membrane waveguide-up to 150 mW powers are guided without adverse effects. The specific dynamics of this two-wave nonlinear energy transfer process contrast with those of FSBS, where arbitrarily many optical fields participate in the energy transfer process (see Supplementary Section S5). Finally, the good agreement achieved between experiment and theory corroborate measurements of nonlinear gain and loss.

The highly-controllable dynamics of SIMS-mediated energy transfer may be applied to create new nonlinear physics on a silicon chip. In addition to new schemes for nonreciprocal devices , this process supports significant total power transfer even over a short propagation length. Longer propagation lengths (~   7 cm) with similar gain and loss coefficients or different operation schemes could permit > 90% energy transfer .

Discussion

We have shown that this new type of on-chip Brillouin scattering produces dispersive symmetry breaking, net optical amplification, and appreciable mode conversion. These characteristics permit a variety of processes not previously possible in silicon photonics.

Dispersive symmetry-breaking between Stokes and anti-Stokes processes through Brillouin interactions in silicon permits numerous new operations. As discussed above, due to symmetry-breaking SIMS supports single-sideband optical amplification and energy transfer. Since Stokes and anti-Stokes scattering are mediated by different phonons, several schemes for mode cooling are now possible. In addition to resonator-based cooling schemes , the high nonlinear coupling of this system compares favorably with predictions of necessary gain-power products to observe spontaneous Brillouin cooling in a linear waveguide . The large Brillouin gain and low propagation loss of the membrane waveguide system may also permit the creation of Brillouin scattering-induced transparency on a silicon chip . Finally, symmetry-breaking enables the adaptation of many traditional technologies based on BSBS, such as existing methods for slow light , beam combining , and optical memory which are not readily achieved through on-chip FSBS.

The combination of these highly-tailorable physics with broadband mode multiplexers offers many intriguing possibilities for integrated photonic systems. In contrast with previous approaches to Brillouin scattering, the operation scheme used for SIMS in silicon eliminates the need for circulators or narrowband filters to separate pump and signal waves-the four-port system discussed here allows automatic multiplexing/demultiplexing of these waves into spatially separate waveguides which can then be routed to other devices on the same chip. The four-port linear-waveguide system can also be adapted into a laser design by connecting ports 2 of M1 and M2 as diagrammed in Fig. [\ref=fig:xsbs]a. This design creates a cavity for Stokes light while being transparent for pump light. In contrast with traditional Brillouin lasers, this removes the requirement that the FSR match the Brillouin resonance frequency, allowing Brillouin lasers of arbitrary footprint on a silicon chip. The gain and power handling demonstrated in the SIMS-active waveguide should be adequate to create such a laser.

Beyond this specific system, SIMS also enables new devices based on cross-modal coupling on a silicon chip. SIMS is a form of active mode conversion, which may have applications in active switching, power routing, or on-chip mode-division multiplexing . The physics of inter-modal Brillouin scattering can be generalized to any number of spatial modes with different symmetries and couplings, in contrast with stimulated inter-polarization scattering. The SIMS-active membrane waveguide also allows geometric tuning of the gain spectrum-the resonant frequency of the Brillouin-active phonons is directly related to the phononic membrane width, unlike in most BSBS systems . Furthermore, the wavevector and velocity of Brillouin-active phonons can be tuned through optical mode engineering, allowing highly-selectable phonon excitation for on-chip acousto-optic device applications.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated stimulated inter-modal Brillouin scattering in an on-chip system for the first time. This new nonlinear coupling allows inter-modal amplification, single-sideband energy transfer, and unprecedented control over the Brillouin interaction. Through independent photonic and phononic control, we have demonstrated ultralow nonlinear losses intrinsic to the inter-modal coupling and robust acoustic performance. Using this system, we demonstrated net amplification of 2.3 dB and 50% energy transfer from one optical field to another. This tailorable Brillouin nonlinearity can support a wide range of hybrid photonic-phononic technologies for RF and photonic signal processing, and is readily integrable in silicon photonic systems. This work extends the growing body of research on integrated Brillouin photonics by adding powerful new control over the spatial behavior and nonlinear dynamics of the Brillouin interaction.

Methods

Device Fabrication

The silicon waveguides were written on a silicon-on-insulator chip with a 3 [formula]m oxide layer using electron beam lithography on hydrogen silsesquioxane photoresist. Following development, a Cl2 reactive ion etch (RIE) was employed to etch the ridge waveguide structure. After a solvent cleaning step, slots were written to expose the oxide layer, again with electron beam lithography of ZEP520A photoresist and Cl2 RIE. The device was then wet released via a 49% hydrofluoric acid etch of the oxide undercladding. The waveguide structures under test are each comprised of 461 suspended segments.

Experiment

Both experiments used a pump laser operating around 1550 nm. The following abbreviations are used in the experimental diagram:

Fig. [\ref=fig:ssb]a: IM Mach-Zehnder intensity modulator, BC DC bias controller, EDFA erbium-doped fiber amplifier, NF notch filter, DUT device under test, AOM acousto-optic frequency shifter, PD photodetector, RFSA radio frequency spectrum analyzer.

For further details on the experimental setup, see Supplementary Section S2.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported through a seedling grant under the direction of Dr. Daniel Green at DARPA MTO and by the Packard Fellowship for Science and Engineering; N.T.O. acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowships Program. We thank Prashanta Kharel for technical discussions involving Brillouin dynamics, and Dr. Michael Rooks and Dr. Michael Power for assistance with process development. We also thank Shai Gertler for his assistance in the development of early mode multiplexer designs.

Author Contributions

E.A.K. and N.T.O. fabricated the waveguide devices. E.A.K., N.T.O., and P.T.R. developed multi-physics simulations for and designed the devices. E.A.K. and N.T.O. conducted experiments with the assistance of P.T.R. E.A.K., P.T.R., and N.T.O. developed analytical models to interpret measured data. All authors contributed to the writing of this paper.

Additional Information

Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.