         WEIGHT-LOSS PROCEDURE FOR MACINTOSH POSTSCRIPT CODE.

                             Marc Vilain
                         mbv@linus.mitre.org

                   Mon, 25 Jul 1994 15:33:36 -0400

            minor changes by John Carroll (jac@cl.cam.ac.uk)
                    Tue, 23 Aug 94 16:28:52 +0100

Word processors on the Macintosh can readily generate PostScript (ps)
code through an option built into the LaserWriter printer driver.  To
do so, print your document with the "PostScript (R) File" option
selected.  This will cause the printer driver to send the ps code to a
file instead of to a printer.

Unless the appropriate care is taken, however, these ps files can
easily attain gargantuan proportions.  The problem is that the
laserwriter driver uses the ps code to download to the printer any
fonts that are not built into the printer.  This occurs at the penalty
of 50K to 100K per font.  While this is to be expected for "exotic"
typefaces purchased from font suppliers, it can often be the case that
these downloaded fonts include such stalwarts as Times, Helvetica, or
Symbol -- all of which are built into any ps printer.

The following procedure keeps the size of ps files under control by
eliminating redundant downloading of fonts.  The resulting weight loss
can be expected to be as much 80-90%.

(1) Eliminate any fonts from the body of the text that are not in the
basic set found on most postscript printers.  If the document is in an
elegant font such as Garamond, convert it to a boring font such as
Times.  Pay special attention to dingbats (decorative symbols such as
pointing hands), and make sure that these are only drawn from a safe
font such as Zapf Dingbats.  Generally safe fonts found on nearly all
printers are: Times, Symbol, Helvetica, Helvetica Narrow, Courier,
Palatino, Bookman, New Century Schoolbook, Zapf Dingbats, and Zapf
Chancery.  Note, however, that some inexpensive printers only build in
a subset of these, typically Times, Helvetica, Courier, and Symbol.

(2) If the document contains embedded illustrations, perform the same
kind of font replacement for them as was done for the text.

(3a) Check which version of the LaserWriter printer driver you have
on your machine. (Do 'Get Info' on it - it will be in the Extensions
folder inside the System Folder in System 7, or at the top level of
the System Folder in System 6). If it is older than 8.1.1, then
get hold of and install the latest version. Here is a URL for it:

<ftp.apple.com:/dts/mac/sys.soft/imaging/laserwriter.8.1/laserwriter-8-1-image-1440.hqx>

(Or try this one:
<ftp.support.apple.com:/pub/Apple SW Updates/Macintosh/Printing Software/Laserwriter 8.1.1 (1.4MB dsk).hqx>

Those are intentional spaces in the path -- Apple set this up for
navigating with a Mac.  The hqx file is a disk image, which must be
dumped onto a floppy through DART or some other disk copying utility.
It seems to avoid the bane of past laserwriter drivers, in which version
n of the driver would reinitialize the printer if the last thing
printed came from version n+1 (or vice versa).)

Then when printing, in the dialog box that pops up asking for the
name of the file in which to save the postscript code, select in the
'Font inclusion' pop-up menu at the bottom 'All But Standard 13'.
If you can't use this version of the laserWriter driver then life gets
a bit more complicated: see 3b below.

(3b) Uninstall any Truetype font definitions for the basic postscript
font set.  For the non-congnoscenti, Truetype is a competing font
standard to Adobe's Type 1 fonts, which are the kind built into
postscript printers.  In System 7, Truetype versions of many basic
fonts (including Times, Helvetica, etc) are put in place as part of
the System 7 installation.  When the laserwriter printer driver
encounters a Truetype font in a document, it must download that font
to the printer, even if the font duplicates a built-in printer font
such as Times.  Worse yet, the driver must also download a TrueType
interpreter (called the rasterizer), at the cost of +/- 100K.  To
avoid this redundant font downloading, uninstall from your system the
Truetype versions of any fonts in your document.  Instead, use the
font bitmaps provided with your printer or with old System 6 software.
Note that this may cause some line breaks to shift, because the letter
spacing in the Truetype versions of these fonts is ever-so-slightly
different from the versions built into the printers and the
corresponding bitmaps.

If you use Adobe Type Manager (ATM), then you probably installed
into your system a number of font definitions for the basic postscript
fonts (Times, etc).  ATM uses these definitions to scale the fonts
smoothly on the screen.  Once again, however, the laserwriter driver
donwloads these font definitions because it treats them as foreign
fonts that are not built into the printer, even if they only duplicate
the basic printer fonts.  To avoid this, uninstall these font
definitions by removing them from your system folder (in system 6) or
your extensions folder (in system 7).  

(4) Finally, if you use MS Word, and in particular, the MS Word
equation editor, you might unknowingly be using the MT Extra font.
The equation editor uses this font to draw such things as oversize
curly braces and to redefine a few standard characters (like "...").
MT extra is a truetype font, which -- guess what -- must be downloaded
along with the rasterizer.  To avoid this +/- 150K overhead, you can
try several things.  MS Word has a gross formula command language,
which looks like an even-more cryptic version of TeX (for
documentation, look for the "Formulas" heading in Word's on-line
help).  Alternatively, a *really* gross but effective hack, is to copy
any offending equation into a draw program, convert it to a 300-dpi
bitmap, and paste the bitmap back into the document instead of the
equation.  Caveat: as noted, the equation editor only invokes MT Extra
in certain cases.  Before you resort to any of the aforementioned
gross hacks, you can tell if your equations are causing MT Extra to be
downloaded by slogging through the ps file.  If you spot pages and
pages of hexadecimal crud immediately before one of your equations,
then you are downloading the rasterizer along with MT Extra.

For illustrative purposes, the following table summarizes the results
of applying this weight loss procedure to a six-page conference paper
before submitting it to the e-print archives.  The paper was
originally in Times, with three box and arrows figures and a bunch of
equations.

Original paper:                                 966K
After removing exotic dingbat fonts:            744K
After removing exotic fonts in figures:         552K
After removing TrueType/ATM versions of Times:  327K
After removing TrueType/ATM versions of Symbol: 277K
After converting offensive eqns to bitmaps:     122K

The size of the final paper is less than 13% of that of the original!
Compressed, the paper is reduced to 51K (71K uuencoded).

Finally, note that you probably only want to perform step (3b) above
as a temporary measure, as it disables useful features of ATM and
Truetype.  You may need to restart your Mac after this step.

