Where Are the Binary Source Gravitational Microlensing Events? II

submitted to The Astrophysical Journal: Apr 27, 1998

Preprint: CNU-A&SS-05/98

Introduction

Experiments to detect Massive Astronomical Compact Halo Objects (MACHOs) by monitoring light variations of stars caused by gravitational microlensing have been carried out and nearly 300 events have been detected (Alcock et al. 1997, Ansari et al. 1996, Udalski et al. 1997, Alard & Guibert 1997). When both the lens and source star are approximated as point sources, the light curve of a lensing event is related to the lens-source separation in units of the Einstein ring radius rE by

[formula]

where β is the impact parameter and t0 is the time of maximum amplification. The Einstein ring radius crossing time (Einstein timescale) is related to the physical parameters of the lens system by

[formula]

where M is the mass of the lens, v is the lens-source transverse speed, and Dol, Dls, and Dos are the separations between the observer, lens, and source.

The lensing light curve deviates from the ideal form in equation (1) if either the lens or the source is composed of binaries: binary-lens (BLL) and binary-source lensing (BSL) events. Currently, 6 candidate BLL events have been reported by various groups (MACHO LMC#1, Dominik & Hirshfeld 1994, 1996; OGLE#7, Udalski et al. 1994; DUO#2, Alard, Mao, & Guibert  1995; MACHO LMC#9, Bennett et al. 1996; MACHO Bulge 95-12, Pratt et al. 1995; MACHO Bulge 96-3, Stubbs et al. 1997). In contrast, the frequency of BSL events is relatively very low despite the same multiplicity of lenses and sources, and only a single candidate BSL event has been reported (MACHO LMC 96-2, Becker et al. 1997). To account for the rarity of BSL events, Dominik (1998) pointed out that for a typical BSL event the separation between the component source stars is very large, resulting in large difference in impact parameters between the component binary source stars. In these cases, the light curve of the highly amplified source star is barely affected by the light from the star with low amplification, making the observed BSL light curve difficult to distinguish from that of a single source lensing (SSL) event.

In this paper, we determine the fraction of events with similar source star amplifications is as much as ~  8%, and thus show that the very low detection rate for BSL events cannot be explained by this effect alone. By carrying out realistic simulations of BSL events, we find that a significant fraction of BSL events are additionally missed from detection due to various other reasons. First, if the flux ratio between the component stars is very large, the light curve of the bright star is hardly affected by the light from the faint star. Second, if the separation is too small, the binary source stars behave like a single star, making it difficult to separate the BSL event from a SSL event. Finally, although the probability of detecting BSL events increases as the source separation increases, still some fraction of BSL events will be missed because the light curves of these events will mimic those of SSL events with longer timescales and larger values of the impact parameter.

BSL Events

The light curve of a BSL event is the superposition of the light curves from the individual source stars and is represented by

[formula]

where i = 1, 2 denote the primary (brighter) and companion (fainter) source stars respectively, F0,i are their unamplified fluxes, [formula] are the contributions of individual source star fluxes to the total flux, and A(ui) are the amplifications of the individual source stars. If there is no blending, F2 = 1 - F1. The lens-source separations for the BSL event are related to the lensing parameters by

[formula]

Therefore, compared to the 3 lensing parameters (tE, t0, and β) that must be fit to a SSL event, a fit to a BSL event light curve requires 6 parameters (F1, tE, t0,i, and βi). However, for various reasons the light curves of BSL events are often difficult to distinguish from those of SSL events, resulting in the low rate at which BSL events are identified. In the following sections, we investigate various reasons for the scarcity of detected BSL events and estimate what fraction of the actual number of BSL events are missed due to these reasons.

BSL Events with Large Amplification Difference

As one reason for the rarity of detectable BSL events, Dominik (1998) pointed out that if the difference in the impact parameters between the two source stars [formula] is too large, the amplification of one star completely dominates that of the other. As a result, the light curve of the BSL event appears to be that of a SSL event, i.e., ABSL  ~  FjA(uj), where j represents the source star with higher amplification. The probability that a BSL event has a large δβ increases as the separation between source stars [formula] increases, and thus BSL events are misidentified more frequently in cases of wide source star separations. Therefore, if most binary source stars are widely separated compared to the typical size of the Einstein ring, a significant fraction of BSL events will be indistinguishable from SSL events.

We now show, however, that the very low detection rate for BSL events cannot be explained by large values of δβ alone. To determine the fraction of actual BSL events that are misidentified as SSL events due to large δβ, we compute the distribution of BSL events with δβ less than a limiting value δβ lim as a function of binary source separation: [formula]. This distribution is obtained by convolving the distribution of BSL separations [formula] with the mean probability [formula] for each BSL event with [formula] to have δβ  ≤  δβ lim, i.e., [formula].

For [formula] we adopt the distribution found by Duquennoy & Mayor (1991), which is based on the orbital periods of 164 G dwarf samples. They found that the distribution of orbital periods appeared remarkedly symmetric and could be approximated by a Gaussian with a mean and standard deviation given by 〈 log P〉  ~  4.8 and σlog P  ~  2.3 in units of days. When the typical mass of a binary system is assumed to be [formula], the distribution of binary source star separations has also a Gaussian form with the mean and standard deviation given by [formula] and [formula] in units of AU. This form of [formula] is shown in the top panel of Figure 1.

To compute [formula], we carried out a simulation in which we produce a set a binaries whose component stars are separated uniformly from zero to infinity. For each binary, we assign the impact parameter for the first event, which is uniformly distributed over the range 0  ≤  β1  ≤  1. Once β1 is assigned, the impact parameter of the second star is assigned by [formula] and δβ is computed as [formula]. Here the position angle θ is randomly distributed in the range 0  ≤  θ  ≤  2π. Unlike β1, we allow β2 to have any value. Therefore, according to our definition of a BSL event, both stars in the binary do not necessarily pass inside the Einstein ring as long as at least one of the two stars does. Finally, the probability [formula] is obtained by computing the fraction of all events yielding δβ  ≤  δβ lim. In the middle and lower panels of Figure 1, we present [formula] and the corresponding distributions of [formula] for the two cases δβ lim = 0.1 and 1.0. Here we have assumed rE = 1 AU, which is the typical Einstein ring radius for Galactic bulge events, with [formula], Dol  ~  5 kpc, and Dos  ~  8 kpc, which comprise the majority of detected microlensing events.

From the distribution [formula] we find that the fraction of BSL events with equivalent source star impact parameters is still substantial. For example, the fraction of BSL events with δβ  ≤  δβ lim  =  0.1 comprises ~  8.2% of the total (represented by the dark shaded region in the lower panel of Figure 1). Assuming a stellar duplicity rate of ~  50% (Abt & Levy 1976), if large δβ were the only reason for the low rate of BSL event detections, among the total of ~  300 microlensing events one would expect to find ~  12 BSL events, far exceeding the single detection to date. Therefore, additional reasons are required to explain the rarity of BSL events.

BSL Events with Equivalent Amplifications

In the previous section we showed that the very low detection rate of BSL events cannot be explained solely by large differences in amplification and so additional reasons are required. To find these reasons, we carry out realistic simulations of BSL events whose source star amplifications are equivalent. In order to match the observational conditions of the current lensing experiments, in the simulation, we assume observations are made using a 1.27 m telescope with a dichroic beam splitter for simultaneous imaging in two bands, following to those of the MACHO group. The CCD camera can detect 25 photons s- 1 from a V = 20 mag. star on a 1 m telescope. We assume a magnitude of m = 17 for the primary star, which is typical for Galactic bulge source stars, and that the brightness difference between the primary and secondary stars, δm, follows the distribution f(δm). To see how our results depend on the distributions f(δm) for different spectral types of primary source stars, we examine 3 types: A, B, and G dwarfs. The distributions f(δm) are adopted from Abt & Levy (1985) for A stars, Abt, Gomez, & Levy (1990) for B stars, and Duquennoy & Mayor (1991) for G stars, and are listed in Table 1. Note that these distributions are identical to those adopted by Griest & Hu (1992) to determine the frequency of various types of BSL events.

Once both source stars are selected, we produce BSL events according to equations (3) and (4), in which the difference in impact parameters is restricted to be less than 0.1. In our example, events are assumed to have tE  =  15 days, which is the most common value observed for Galactic bulge events. The observations are assumed to be carried out twice each night during the period - 3tE  ≤  t  ≤  3tE with the high photometric precision of 1%. Then the light curve of each BSL event is fitted with a SSL event light curve as given in equation (1) and the resulting χ2 is obtained by

[formula]

where Npt is the number of data points, p = 1% is the photometric precision, NSSL(t) is the photon counts of the theoretical SSL event light curve, and NBSL(t) represents the counts predicted for the simulated BSL event. We define 'detectable BSL events' to be the BSL events whose light curves can be distinguished from those of SSL events with a confidence level greater than 3σ.

In Table 1, we list the mean probability P3σ(δm) of detecting a BSL event with δm, averaged over the entire ranges of [formula] and β. We also list the distribution of BSL events which can be distinguished from SSL events at a high confidence level as a function of source brightness difference, which is obtained by f3σ(δm)  =  P3σ(δm)f(δm). From the table one can find several trends. First, regardless of the spectral types, the probability of BSL events whose light curves can be distinguished from SSL events is very low even with similar source star amplifications and high precision photometry. The probability is especially low for events with large brightness differences between component stars. For example, detecting events with [formula] is highly unlikely; the number of these events comprise ~  1 / 2 of the total BS events, although there is some dependence on the stellar types. Second, as the brightnesses of the source stars become equivalent, the probability P3σ increases. However, even for these events, the probability of detecting BSL events is low. We find P3σ(δm  ~  2.5)  ~  6.5% and P3σ(δm  ~  0.7)  ~  10.7%. This is because binary source stars with very small separations ([formula]) behave as if they were single source stars, making them difficult to distinguish from SSL events; these events with small [formula] comprise ~  75% of the total number of BSL events with δβ  ≤  0.1. Additionally, the light curves of some fraction of BSL events with medium size separations ([formula]) mimic those of SSL events with lensing parameters adjusted to longer timescales and larger impact parameters. Consequently, the fraction of detectable BSL events is very small ([formula]), even among events with similar amplifications.

Summary

The detection rate of BSL events is very low relative to the detection rate of BLL events despite similar duplicities of lenses and source stars. The scarcity of BSL event detections results from a combination of reasons. First, if the difference in impact parameters between individual components of a BSL event is very large, the light curve with lower amplification has little effect on that of the high amplification event, making the observed BSL event light curve difficult to distinguish from a SSL event one. However, we find that the fraction of BSL events with similar source star amplifications is still substantial (~  8% for δβ  ≤  0.1), and thus the very low detection rate of BSL events cannot be explained by this reason alone. We find that the light curves of an important fraction of BSL events are additionally confused with SSL events due to various other reasons. These reasons include the large brightness differences between source stars, small source star separations, and the imitation by BSL events of SSL events with longer timescales and larger impact parameters.

NOTE.-- Here P3σ(δm) represents the mean probability for distinguishing between a SSL event and a BSL event with source star brightness difference δm. The values of P3σ(δm) are averaged over the entire range of source star separations and impact parameters. To show the BSL event detectability for similar source star amplifications, the difference in impact parameters is restricted to be less than 0.1. Then the distribution of detectable BSL events as a function of δm is obtained by f3σ(δm)  =  P3σ(δm)f(δm), where f(δm) is the distribution of source star brightness differences. One finds that even with similar source star amplifications, the fraction of BSL events is very small ([formula]) regardless of source star spectral types.

Upper panel: The model distribution of binary source star separations, [formula]. Middle panel: The mean probability of BSL events having a difference in impact parameters less than a limiting value of δβ lim as a function of source star separation [formula], [formula]. Here we present [formula] for the two cases δβ lim = 0.1 and 1.0. Lower panel: The distribution of BSL events with the impact parameter difference less than δβ as a function of [formula], [formula]. We assume rE  =  1 AU which typical for Galactic bulge events with [formula], Dos  ~  5 kpc and Dos  ~  8 kpc. The fractions of BSL events with δβ less than 0.1 and 1.0 are 8.2% and 22.1%, respectively.