=1

Companding technique for high dynamic range measurements using gafchromic films.

Introduction

The use of gafchromic films as a measurement device has become popular during the last few years. There are many reasons for this among which: 1) high resolution, 2) no additional development needed, 3) off the shelf reading tools, and 4) tissue equivalence. Some disadvantages include: 1) variations in sensitivity 2) heterogeneity within a film does exist, and 3) a limited dynamic range does not allow the films to be used to quantify beam characteristics or to measure relatively low doses. Of these disadvantages the last is the most important as batch production and pre-scanning allow to minimize the first two problems.

In this paper we describe a technique to increase the dynamic range to low doses by making use of a rescaling algorithm inspired by companding noise reduction. Companded transmission is a technique that has been used to transmit data over noisy telegraph lines[\cite=clark1928] and has also been used in the audio-industry to reduce cassette tape noise[\cite=dolby1967an]. In essence a signal or part of a signal is amplified before transmission after which it is reduced to its normal level before being fed to the output circuit.

In addition, we will show that this approach allows to perform small field measurements with superior resolution than heretofore possible.

Methods and Materials

Films

We use EBT-II gafchromic films provided by International Specialty Products. Scanning the films at a resolution of 150dpi using a 10000XL Epson scanner. The films are batch calibrated to provide absolute dose values. Two films represent the complete batch and is calibrated using a two film methodology. This procedure has been described elsewhere[\cite=Crijns2011] and provided an absolute error level of the order of 3 to 5 using the red channel output%. The films are calibrated to provide accurate dosimetry between 0.2Gy and 4 Gy.

Companding technique

In order to provide correct data over several decades of dose (i.e. from 4 to 0.002Gy)we use different films to and expose them to different levels of dose. The reference film's dose (D1)is chosen in such a way that the maximal expected dose is close to the maximum from the dose range

[formula]

Registration

As the films exhibit a high resolution (1 pixel ~   0.16mm) it is difficult to exactly reproduce the position of a given film. Additionally, variations in the beam output of a linear accelerator introduces an uncertainty in the dose delivered and thus in the factor used to de-emphasize the signal. Finally, variations in film sensitivity within a single batch of films have been shown to exist and need to be taken into account. For the previously mentioned reasons it might occur that perfect alignment and dose levels differ from film to film. To solve this we introduced an alignment protocol taking into acount in both dosimetric and spatial variations. This is not a straightforward problem as the geometric registration and the dose level are not independent parameters.

The registration between two films of subsequent level of companding is performed as follows:

We define the registration as a 4-dimensional vector (Xi,Yi,θi,Fi) with Xi and Yi being the translational coordinates and θi a rotational parameter, the component Fi denotes the emphasis factor.

The films are converted to dose using the aforementioned calibration. Only data that falls within the upper limits (Ui) and lower limit (Li) of calibration is retained.

The two films are registered using data that is contained in the overlap between the two calibration ranges. This is dependent on the position of the film as well as the dose factor.

The cost function to register the images is the dose difference between the two images multiplied by the gradient image [formula], with GX and GY the gradient calculated in the X and Y direction of the film which are chosen to follow the film edges. The parameter a is set at 500 to allow the gradient function to have an impact on the images used as the gradient image is normalized to have an integrated amplitude of 1.

The cost function is optimized using a constrained minimization algorithm as implemented in the function fmincon in Matlab[\cite=Coleman1994Convergence], with the option interior-point approach.

The minimization procedure is performed in a progressive manner starting from sub-sampled image at 50dpi, over 75dpi and finally a full resolution image at 150dpi. For every increase in resolution the constraints within which the optimization is performed are tightened. They are respectively [formula], and [formula]. Using the same notation as for the transformation vector with all spatial values in cm.

The end result is a dose image of high resolution and dynamic range that can be used to characterize a radiation beams in treatment planning systems or to provide data on radiation dose levels far from the field edge. An example of a resulting data set is provided in Figure [\ref=combined].

Validation

The validation is performed with a single set-up. A stack of solid water is irradiated using a clinical 6MV photon beam from a Varian C/D 2100 linear accelerator. The gafchromic films are placed at a depth of 5cm, with the surface of the stack located at 95cm. We present three different tests.

A 10×  10 cm2 field is compared to the results from a planning system (Varian Eclipse™) with the pencil beam and the AAA-algorithm. In addition the low dose area is compared to measurements using TLDs. This data set has also been used in the Allegro project to compare with TPS data. Here we add the TLD validation.

A Brainlab™~   radio surgery cone with an opening size of 30mm with the machine jaws set to a 5×  5 cm2 size is compared to the data obtained for entry in the Brainscan™~   planning system. For this purpose the field is measured with a PTW pinpoint chamber type 31006 of size 0.015cc using a waterphantom.

In an identical setup a cone of opening size 7.5mm was also assessed.

TLD

LiF:Mg,Ti TLDs (TLD-100 EXTRAD, Harshaw) are used. Calibration of the dosimeters was per-formed in a 6 MV beam at 5cm depth in a polystyrene phantom. The TLDs are read-out in a Harshaw 6600 hot gas reader, equipped with a 90Y/90Sr source. In order to minimize initial fading effects, read-out of calibration TLDs that have been irradiated with the internal source simultaneously with the experiment, is part of the standard processing procedure.

Results

[formula] fields

Figure [\ref=1010] provides a graph for the open field test. It is clear that the TLD's agree well with the film measurements. Due to the low dose on the TLD's there are considerable absolute error bars on these measurements. Also with doses to TLDs of this magnitude the contribution of the background can cause an offset in the measurements. A good agreement with the planning system is found when AAA is used. The pencil beam data does not agree that well.

Small field dosimetry 30mm cone

As in the classical field one can notice the difference in resolution of the gafchromic film compared to the measurement. In this case a pinpoint chamber was used. Figure [\ref=small30] shows a log plot of the relative dose. The measurement here is performed using a pinpoint chamber, however a broadening of the field edge compared to the film is easily discernible.

Small field dosimetry 7.5mm cone

In the case of the data obtained with irradiation using the smallest cone there is no plateau in the data measured using the pinpoint chamber, leading us to believe that there are partial volume effects in play already. The film measurement does show a plateau phase. Also the ratio of the maximal measured dose compared to the output from a 10x10 field (output ratio) was more than double with film than with the pinpoint chamber. Due to these differences we have never used the smallest cone clinically. Furthermore, away from the central axis we note an increase in dose. Although the dose remains low increasing from 0.2% to 0.5% of the dose delivered to the central axis.

Alignment

In table [\ref=table10] the transformation needed to match the different films show that there was a difference in response or machine output of the films used to measure the smaller dose compared to the normal film. It also shows that reasonable accuracy can be reached by mechanically positioning the films correctly in treatment as well as readout position. However, although shifts are of the order of less than 0.5 mm in the case of very steep gradients important inconsistencies can be introduced when using manual alignment only. The latter becomes important in the case of very small fields.

Discussion

The approach as outlined here has been used to perform measurements within the framework of the ALLEGRO project. The goal of one of the workgroups was to determine the dose outside of the high dose volume. This to estimate the impact of newer radiotherapy techniques on the whole body dose. A second question to answer was whether data from commercial planning systems would be able to serve as a resource to obtain information on low-dose exposures. It was therefore necessary to enhance the accuracy of low dose measurements.

From the work in this paper and the comparisons with TLD measurements and ion-chamber data, we conclude that this technique provides data that not only allows estimates of low-dose contributions to patients, but also provides spatial information. The use of gafchromic film in this fashion will also allow its use in the characterization of radiation systems that deliver doses to very small volumes.

Acknowledgements

This study was partly funded by the ALLEGRO-project (7th Euratom Framework Programme for Nuclear Research and Training, Fission-2008-3.2.1).

Author Contributions

Mr. Van den Heuvel outlined the idea and approach and provided a proof of concept. Mr Crijns actualized the registration component. Mr Defraene provided the TLD validation and the registration test. All authors contributed to discussions and writing the article.