World Wide Student Laboratory

Introduction

This paper describes a new framework in educational technology - the World Wide Student Laboratory Project. Its main goals are to improve the efficiency of educating students in the principles of advanced experimental research, to stimulate student's interest in science and to provide professional resources to educators. The World Wide Student Laboratory ( WWSL ) Project expands upon traditional laboratory study. It allows students to study natural phenomena while learning an Internet-based telecommunication and computer technology and studying the methods of transmission, processing and analyzing experimental data. In this publication, the concepts of the World Wide Student Laboratory are outlined, a possible idea for structure is discussed and examples of various laboratory studies (projects) are shown.

Concept of the World Wide Student Laboratory

Based on the Internet, the World Wide Web (WWW) has been rapidly growing over the last several years. The WWW is a combination of a large number of computer servers which can send documents or "pages" to Internet clients using a Web-browser software for navigation between the different "sites." From the beginning the WWW has primarily been used for educational purposes in three ways [\cite=1]: The student's laboratory practice work is the main form of experimental research study. The efficiency of traditional labs have certain limits: In the framework of the WWSL project, we offer new methods of educational technology which complement the traditional methods and upgrade the standard of experimental research study even with the use of existing lab equipment. These methods may also significantly reduce the above mentioned limits of laboratory practice work. The concept of WWSL may be expressed in the following way:

The main features of the WWSL project involve the following: WWSL should enrich the personal research results of each student and help lab studies approach the top-level scientific research. It is important to emphasise that WWSL is not a "virtual" laboratory. It is a real lab where actual experiments (with all real-world "noisy" effects) can be made.

The traditional form of conducting some experiments is still preferable for laboratory studies. However, from our point of view, the following projects would be better served by WWSL:

The Structure of WWSL

Presently, the World Wide Student Laboratory is developing using the following structure: The general coordination of WWSL operations is conducted by the WWSL Coordination Center which fulfils the following functions: A Research Group Site would be created to conduct a particular series of student lab studies. It combines the sites of Experimental Setups of participating organizations. If it is required, the activity of each Research Group can be defined by a Research Program which is prepared by Educators from participating Universities. The Research Group Site has the following functions: The Site of the Experimental Setup may be located at a computer which is a part of the setup and is used for data storage, data processing and analysis of the results from that setup. It is maintained by the Educator in charge of the setup. Students use sites they must create (analogous to an electronic lab book) for access to WWSL resources, to control experimental setups and for processing and analysing experimental data. Their site would also be used to prepare the final report of a completed experiment. The structure of WWSL is not complicated and uses existing technology. Although it can take advanage of then, it does not rely on new technical developments at student or research laboratories or on the Internet.

Presently, the first stage of the WWSL development has been completed [\cite=2]. An Official Site of the WWSL Project has been created on the University of Oregon Physics Department's web server, in Eugene Oregon, USA. On that server, a Site for the "Cosmic Rays" Research Group has been organised. It combines two student research setups, one of which is located at the University of Oregon, the other is located at the Department of Physics at N. E. Bauman Moscow State Technical University, Moscow, Russia. The next stage is going to involve a number of projects for students who are studying General Physics, Radiophysics, Statistical Physics and Biophysics. The following projects are under discussion and/or development:

Examples of possible WWSL projects

Let us now consider some possible student projects which can be completed in laboratory setups for studying the properties of cosmic rays. These studies are part of the curriculum of physics and engineering majors in many universities [\cite=3], [\cite=4]. The setup consists of two detectors, usually scintillating. An absorber of variable thickness (a set of lead or tungsten plates) is sandwiched between them. The signals from the detectors are read out to a coincidence unit. The unit selects events due to cosmic ray particles passing through both detectors. The output signals from coincidence units are collected by a data acquisition system and a computer. Student projects which can be pursued using these setups can be divided into two groups: The first group may contain the following projects: The second group may contain the following projects: The experimental data collected with the setups for the detection of cosmic rays allows students to fulfil the studies of all the topics listed above simultaneously, and WWSL provides the tools to study them fully.