The Southern Dwarf Hunt: Local Group Dwarf Candidates in the Southern Sky

Dwarf Galaxies

We describe here results of our search for Local Group low surface-brightness (LSB) dwarf galaxies. LSB dwarfs form a population heavily selected against in galaxy surveys and catalogs (for obvious reasons), but of disproportionate importance in stellar, galactic and cosmological studies.

An accurate census of the small and faint end of the galaxy population is necessary for the determination of the true galaxy luminosity function, and is a difficult thing to do [\citep=M96] [\citep=IB97]. The Schechter form of the luminosity function with exponent α in the range 1.2-1.8, a popular region, formally diverges. If there is not to be an infinite number of faint galaxies, the function must truncate; this point has not yet been found, and faint galaxies dominate by number in volume-limited samples [\citep=MD97]. The luminosity function itself provides strong constraints on theories of galaxy formation [\citep=BST88]. In particular, the number of dwarfs in the Local Group appears to be underpredicted by an order of magnitude in hierarchical clustering theories [\citep=Klyp99]. Although refinements in theory narrow the discrepancy [\citep=BFL01], the problem remains (see our discussion below).

Apart from numbers, the clustering properties of dwarfs compared with larger galaxies contains important information on such things as the bias parameter and the spectrum of initial density fluctuations from which galaxies grew [\citep=BST88].

Dark matter dominates the internal dynamics of dwarfs to a much greater degree than larger objects [\citep=M94] [\citep=H96], and thus they provide an especially good place to investigate the nature of this mysterious stuff. The external dynamics has been used to derive an age of the universe independent of the global Hubble constant [\citep=L81] [\citep=W99] as well as the mass of the Local Group.

The star-formation histories of dwarf galaxies appear to be qualitatively different from those of larger objects; indeed, within the Local Group each dwarf differs from each other [\citep=H94] [\citep=G97] [\citep=M98]. They thus provide valuable laboratories to study the general phenomenon of star formation in a variety of environments.

Dwarf Hunting

One expects LSB dwarf galaxies to be hard to find. It requires a great deal of care to detect an object which is actually fainter than the night sky (and our targets are typically only a few percent of dark sky brightness). This means that in any survey they will be seriously underrepresented. Accordingly, one must look at a lot of sky to find a few (or concentrate effort where there is likely to be a relative abundance of them). For this reason photographic plates, which provide large area coverage, have been the popular basis of searches. However, CCDs provide greater sensitivity and more controlled enhancement of small signals in large noise, so when possible they have been used. (For a discussion of selection effects affecting LSB objects, see [\citet=DI99], especially the contributions of Freeman, of McGaugh and of Huchra; also useful is the survey of surveys by Delcanton in the same volume.)

To correct for the unavoidable incompleteness and bias of a survey it is useful to have strict criteria, and if possible to perform the survey automatically. [\citet=A98] and [\citet=A99] have used an enhancement technique on digitized POSSII plates to discover new satellite galaxies of M31. However, any direct detection algorithm for low-signal objects tends to produce a very large number of false detections. For this reason, and to cover larger areas in the sky, visual examination of photographic sky surveys is a viable technique. [\citet=KK98], [\citet=KKS00] and [\citet=KK00] examined film copies of the POSSII plates (with some success, [\citet=KK99]), as did [\citet=C97].

As opposed to limited-area searches (for example, around nearby galaxy groups where the probablility of encountering a galaxy of any type is assumed to be higher), objects in the Local Group might be anywhere in the sky, requiring a full 4π steradian search. In this case the requirement for coverage, together with the small physical size of CCDs, have made the use of photographic methods mandatory for our current efforts. Avoiding also the construction of an elaborate automatic algorithm, we decided to perform a visual search of survey plates starting with the southern sky.

To this end a visual examination of all 894 fields covered by the ESO-SRC and SERC Equatorial surveys of the southern sky [formula] was performed. It was discovered early on that the glass copies of the surveys were significantly better than film copies for picking up very faint objects, so glass was used exclusively. Objects resembling the Andromeda dwarf spheroidals and the Tucana dwarf, that is of very low surface brightness, diffuse and large (one to a few minutes of arc), were noted. (Very nearby objects, of large angular size and completely resolved, would tend to get lost among the star foreground, so our search is not sensitive to close Milky Way satellites. We had no chance, for instance, of finding the Sagittarius dwarf visually. Paradoxically, more distant objects are easier to see.) The "bright" limit of accepted objects is difficult to quantify and probably varied significantly from plate to plate, though in all cases was well above the brightness of the known dwarfs. The faint limit, within the variations of the plate material itself, was probably more stable. (For an a posteriori examination of the limits and reliability of the survey, see section 5.1.) The size was determined with a ruler and the image on the plate, which was not always the same size as that found during followup observations and is in any case ill-defined for most of these objects. No candidate measuring one minute or over in all directions was rejected as being too small; a few cases which appeared to be on the borderline and are in fact smaller were included.

Even though LSB galaxies cannot be detected near the galactic plane, all plates were examined. At these signal levels the distribution of Galactic nebulosity dense enough to interfere with the search is very irregular and difficult to predict, so we avoided the problem of prediction altogether. As a byproduct, we discovered several planetary nebulae (which are interesting in their own right).

Plate defects were screened out by requiring an object's presence on both blue and red plates. The same procedure eliminated most reflection nebulae due to their blue colors. Dwarflike objects noted by the UK Schmidt Telescope Unit during the survey [\citep=T74], but not previously followed up, were also added to the list. Catalogs of known objects were consulted (chiefly the NASA Extragalactic Database, NED) and galaxies of high radial velocity as well as planetary nebulae were excluded. Finally, when time at the telescope for followup observations permitted, we examined objects which were not necessarily LSB dwarfs but had been identified by others as possible Local Group members.

Followup Observations

The majority of the objects from our list (both those derived from survey plates and those from other sources) were imaged using the 1.5m telescope at Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory (CTIO) with a thinned Tek 2048  ×  2048 CCD. Some of the more northerly ones were followed up using the central CCD of the Wide Field Camera (WFC) on the 2.5m Isaac Newton Telescope (INT) at the Observatorio del Roque de los Muchachos in the Canary Islands. At the f/13.5 Cassegrain focus of the 1.5m CTIO telescope the scale is 0.24 arcsec/pixel and the field coverage is just over 8  ×  8 arcmin. The central thinned 4k×  2k EEV CCD on the INT WFC, mounted at prime focus, gives a spatial coverage of 22  ×  11 arcmin with a scale of 0.33 arcsec/pixel.

Candidates were initially examined by taking 15-20 minute exposures in the R band. With seeing between 0.9 - 1.4 arcsec this enables stellar objects to R  ≈  23 to be detected. At this depth objects close to or within the Local Group should begin to resolve into stars, with the tip of the giant branch becoming readily visible. If a candidate appeared to resolve into stellar components, further broadband observations in V and I together with narrowband Hα were obtained. The raw CCD frames were processed in the standard way (bias-subtracted, trimmed and flat-fielded using twilight flats taken during the observing run) in almost real time at the telescope to aid in visual inspection of candidates. A series of standard star fields taken from [\citet=L92] were observed at intervals throughout each night.

Data on the Dwarf Candidates

Positions and characteristics of the dwarf galaxy candidates we examined are summarized in table [\ref=data1]. We have listed first those objects derived from our examination of survey plates, then those taken from other sources in the literature. Where the object already had a designation, we have generally refrained from giving it another; where none existed, we have constructed one based on IAU recommendations (see ). KK98 denotes objects from [\citet=KK98], KKS00 from [\citet=KKS00], and KK00 from [\citet=KK00]. Where more than one designation exists for an object we have tried to list all of them (in the first column), since our experience is that different workers prefer different catalogs. The positions are good to within 0.1 minute of arc. The size is that of the visible image at the followup telescope, not of any strictly determined isophote (and would of course be different between the CTIO 1.5m and the INT 2.5m). The nature is determined from the R-band morphology, except in the cases where time allowed an Hα image to confirm (or not) emission nebulae. Additional comments on each object are presented in the next section. Images of all objects are presented in the figures. The scale varies somewhat between objects as indicated in the captions; in all, north is at the top, east to the left. In the cases of certain objects (notably the Antlia and Cetus dwarfs) CTIO images are presented even though better data are available, in the interest of providing a common comparison with the other objects.

Comments on Individual Objects

ESO 410G005 Although this object is clearly resolving, it is slightly too far away to be a Local Group galaxy. [\citet=KSG00] place it in the Sculptor Group on the basis of HST CMD data.

Cetus The Cetus dwarf spheroidal is larger and much more diffuse than most of the objects in our list of candidates. For more detailed information, see [\citet=WHI99].

WHI B0113-62 Nebulosity connected with the galaxy cluster Abell S0143.

WHI B0200-03 This is clearly resolving even on the survey plates. The followup images show it to be a cluster of blue stars (with a distant galaxy cluster in the background).

ESO298G033 A galaxy with a starlike nucleus and very faint disk.

PGC 009140 This is a dwarf spheroidal galaxy, beginning to resolve at the faintest levels (thus outside the Local Group, but not far).

WHI B0240-07 Possibly a LSB barred spiral. No detectable resolution.

WHI B0441+02 Irregular in shape, possibly spiral. There is some granulation which could come from HII regions.

ESO 085G088 This object is either in or behind the Large Magellanic Cloud. From its symmetrical, diffuse morphology we are inclined to call it a galaxy, rather than an LMC nebula.

WHI B0619-07 This appears to be a galaxy showing traces of resolution, though a superimposed foreground star makes study difficult.

WHI B0652+00 A faint reflection nebula.

PGC 020125 Irregular in morphology, resolving into stars clearly. However, the CMD shows visible stars to be supergiants, placing it at a distance of 2-4 Mpc. Informally designated the "Argo dwarf" (it lies in Carina, but there is already a Carina dwarf, so the disused constellation of Argo was resurrected for naming purposes).

WHI B0713-44 A round, brighter section of a more general Galactic nebulosity.

WHI B0717-07 Extremely faint round object. An image in Hα shows it to be a smooth planetary.

PGC 020635 Irregular in form, with foreground stars and background galaxies making detailed study difficult.

ESO368G004 Foreground stars give an illusion of resolution at first glance.

PGC 021406 A faint, diffuse galaxy.

WHI B0740-02 The low-surface brightness object is the extended halo of a cD galaxy at the center of a cluster.

WHI B0744-05 Possibly spiral, though a foreground star makes it difficult to be sure.

WHI B0750-55 A round, diffuse galaxy.

ESO 165G006 Although cataloged as a galaxy no less than three times, this object is in fact a rather pretty planetary nebula, as shown by the hydrogen-alpha image.

WHI B0921-36 A very faint, large area of Galactic nebulosity.

ESO 126G019 This object has an overall diffuse morphology. However, at the very lowest signal level there is structure which may be the beginning of resolution.

KDG 058 Very faint, diffuse galaxy.

WHI B0959-61 A large reflection nebula. No detectable Hα.

Antlia The clear resolution of Antlia into stars provides a contrast with most other objects in this catalog. Further details are provided in [\citet=W97].

PGC 030367 Extremely large and diffuse. No detectable Hα.

WHI B1030-62 A relatively large emission nebula, probably a planetary, as shown by our Hα image.

ESO 215G009 Diffuse galaxy.

WHI B1103-14 Across the north end of this faint, diffuse galaxy lies a chain of HII regions (confirmed by Hα imaging).

WHI B1117-68 A large, dim reflection nebula.

PGC 035171 Faint, diffuse galaxy.

PGC 036594 Very faint galaxy.

WHI B1241-54 Faint reflection nebula.

WHI B1243-20 A large, faint, diffuse bit of Galactic nebulosity.

WHI B1249-33 Very large and diffuse. Noted by the UKSTU.

ESO 269G066 Diffuse galaxy.

PGC 046680 Diffuse galaxy.

PGC 048001 Galaxy behind a thick layer of foreground stars.

PGC 048178 This galaxy shows traces of a bar and ring structure.

ESO174G001 This galaxy is showing some resolution into stars at the limit of detection, but only after stacking several exposures. It is therefore too distant to be in the Local Group, but is in the Local Volume.

WHI B1414-52 A planetary nebula, well shown in our Hα image.

WHI B1425-47 Faint reflection nebula.

WHI B1432-47 The object derived from the survey plate is the ill-defined central brighter region of a general nebulosity that fills the CTIO 1.5m field. There is no detectable Hα emission.

WHI B1432-16 Several of the knots on the south side of this galaxy are HII regions, confirmed by an Hα image.

WHI B1444-16 A bright, round object, probably a ring galaxy.

WHI B1505-67 A faint wisp, which is probably part of an even fainter complex of Galactic nebulosity.

WHI B1517-41 A very faint and ill-defined bit of Galactic nebulosity.

WHI B1603-04 Diffuse galaxy.

PGC 057387 Although catalogued as a galaxy, this is clearly a Galactic reflection nebula.

WHI B1619-67 Faint reflection nebula.

PGC 058179 This is probably an obscured galaxy, though it could possibly be a Galactic reflection nebula.

WHI B1728-08 A faint ring, shown to be a planetary by the Hα image.

WHI B1751-07 Although this looks like a spiral galaxy, there is detectable Hα in the same shape, so we identify it as a planetary nebula.

PGC 062147 There are possibly traces of spiral arms in this low surface brightness galaxy.

ESO 458G011 A small, heavily obscured disk galaxy.

WHI B1919-04 A heavily obscured galaxy.

WHI B1952-04 An obscured galaxy with a prominent bar and ring.

ESO 027G002 Diffuse, slightly elongated.

WHI B2212-10 A face-on disk galaxy, with very faint spiral arms.

ESO 468G020 A dwarf spheroidal galaxy, too distant to be in the Local Group but not far away. Clearly resolving. Although it lies in the general direction of the Sculptor Group, it is probably too far away to be a dynamical member.

WHI B2317-32 This is a puzzling object. On the survey plate it appears to be resolving into a handful of stars, but our image shows these to be lumps in a more general nebulosity which is of vaguely spiral form. An image in Hα shows that none of these is an HII region, so it is neither a distant star-forming spiral nor a young Galactic star cluster. To add to the mystery, [\citet=C97] detected it in HI (their object SC 2) with a low heliocentric radial velocity of 68 km s- 1. We tentatively conclude that the identification of the radial velocity with the galaxy is in error, and that this is actually a distant galaxy.

Objects from Other Sources

SC 18 Included in the Sculptor Group survey of [\citet=C97], though on the basis of their available data possibly nearer. Our image, although lumpy, is not resolving, so it is probably in the Sculptor Group (though not on the near side).

ESO 293G035 Identified as a dwarf galaxy in the nearby Sculptor Group by [\citet=C97]. Our image shows a more distant object with a large, low surface brightness plume.

LGS 2 Identified by [\citet=KLS78] as a possible Local Group galaxy (along with LGS 3, which is such an object). Our image shows it to be a brighter region in a large diffuse nebula, so we may answer [\citet=VR81] with a confident "no."

SC 24 Also in the Sculptor Group survey of [\citet=C97] and thought to be possibly nearer. Our image is again lumpy, though not resolved, so it is probably also in the Sculptor Group.

ESO 352G002 Identified as Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. We find a distant spiral galaxy with a superposed star (which probably provided the low radial velocity).

A0107+01 Identified as Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. We find no identifiable galaxy at this position, just a star (which could have provided a low radial velocity).

ESO 416G012 Identified as Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. Our image is clearly of a background spiral, with a star superposed which probably provided the low radial velocity. A higher radial velocity has since been determined.

IC 1947 Identified as Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. Our image shows a background spiral with several neighbors. The starlike nucleus may in fact be a foreground star; this would explain the two low radial velocities in the literature. A radial velocity consistent with a much larger distance has since been determined.

ESO 056G019 Identified by [\citet=SB92] as a Local Group galaxy on the basis of radial velocity, and by NED as a part of the Large Magellanic Cloud on the same basis. Our Hα image shows a very pretty emission nebula, with a bright central part about three minutes across surrounded by a faint shell about eight minutes in diameter.

ESO 318G013 Identified by [\citet=SB92] as a Local Group galaxy on the basis of radial velocity. Our image (R, V and I combined) shows a lumpy spindle, possibly beginning to resolve; however, a Hα image shows that the brightest of the knots are HII regions. It is therefore well outside the Local Group. A superimposed star is probably responsible for a misleading radial velocity. (The bright Hα regions should provide a good optical radial velocity for any observers who care to take up the challenge.)

ISI 1106+0257 This galaxy was chosen from [\citet=ISI96] for its low radial velocity (-69 km/s). (Note that those authors make no claim as to Local Group membership.) Our picture shows a faint barred spiral with a superimposed star; the latter is probably the source of the radial velocity.

ESO 269G070 Identified by [\citet=SB92] as a Local Group galaxy based on radial velocity. Our image shows a smooth disk galaxy with a superimposed star, which is probably the source of a misleading radial velocity (a more believable velocity has since been determined). There is a faint companion galaxy almost in contact to the west.

IC 4247 Identified by [\citet=SB92] as a Local Group galaxy based on radial velocity. Our combination of three images (total of one hour exposure) shows just the beginning of resolution. It is too far away to be in the Local Group, but is in the Local Volume.

NGC 5237 Identified by [\citet=Fa81] as a member of the Local Group based on radial velocity. Interestingly, identified as a member of the NGC 5128 (Centaurus) Group by [\citet=HH84] on the same basis. Our image shows a smooth distribution of light with no trace of resolution, which places it well beyond the Local Group.

IC 4739 Identified as a Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. Our image clearly shows a distant spiral. A superimposed star is probably the source of an erroneous radial velocity, since corrected in the literature.

IC 4789 Identified as a Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. Our image clearly shows a distant spiral with a superposed star, the latter probably providing a misleading radial velocity (since corrected in the literature).

IC 4937 Identified as Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. Our image clearly shows a distant edge-on spiral. A superposed star is probably responsible for a misleading radial velocity.

IC 5026 Identified as Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. Our image clearly shows a distant edge-on spiral. A superposed star is probably responsible for an anomalously low radial velocity.

A2259+12 Identified as Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. We find a small, bright galaxy with no trace of resolution.

ESO 347G008 Identified as Local Group galaxy by [\citet=SB92] on the basis of radial velocity. Our image shows a very diffuse object, not resolving into stars. It is possible that very faint outlying lumps actually trace spiral arms; these (as well as two brighter objects near the center) show up as well in the Hα image. If this galaxy is indeed a very low surface brightness face-on spiral, the size is actually something like 2.6 arc minutes. A higher radial velocity has since been determined.

Summary and Discussion

Completeness of the Local Group Census

This portion of the Dwarf Hunt was successful in its primary object, to find new Local Group dwarfs, as well as its secondary object, to get some idea of how many Local Group galaxies might remain to be found. Unfortunately, the completeness of the survey is difficult to quantify, for three reasons: the sensitivity of the survey plates varies with weather and the condition of the photographic emulsion; galactic extinction varies in a very complicated way with position at low signal levels; and the response of the eye to faint signals is complex and depends on many things. We consider each of these effects in turn below.

[\citet=MES90] studied the variation in sensitivity among the 185 survey plates used for the APM Galaxy Survey. They concluded that the rms plate-to-plate variation amounted to 0.178 magnitude, and that vignetting amounted to 20% loss of light as far as 2.5o from the center of the field. Combining these we may estimate 0.3 magnitudes of variation due to plate material. Since the central (brightest) region of Cetus is 25.05 magnitudes per square arc second (and it is not the faintest object in our list) we very conservatively conclude that our survey was complete to at least 24.7 mag arcsec- 2 in regions clear of Milky Way interference. In particular, we went deep enough to see the majority of very faint objects in the simulations of [\citet=BFL01].

An estimate of the fraction of dwarf galaxies hidden behind the Milky Way may be made using a grading system instituted while searching the plates. Each plate was noted as "good" (424 plates total), "troublesome" (315 plates) or "difficult" (158) based on the amount of background nebulosity interfering with detection of faint galaxies. Taking as a rough measure that no dwarfs will be seen on "difficult" plates, none over about half the area of "troublesome" plates, and that any dwarf would be seen on a "good" plate, about 35% of the sky could contain an unseen faint dwarf galaxy. With eleven of this type of galaxy known in the southern sky (Stextans A, WLM, Fornax, SagDIG, Sculptor, Sextans, Phoenix, Tucana, Carina, Antlia and Cetus), we would expect something like four more to be hiding behind the Milky Way. This estimate may be somewhat low, since nebulosity which obscures but is not luminous would not have affected the plate grading; but this is probably not a big effect. (The interesting, though not Local Group, galaxy Argo was found on a "troublesome" plate).

Reliability of Visual Surveys

There remains the hardest quantity to estimate: the reliability of visual processing of the images. The complicated nature of visual response makes a calculation from theory impractical; the only useful estimate must come from a comparison of results of independent examinations of the same data set.

The most comparable survey to ours is that reported in [\citet=KK98], [\citet=KKS00] and [\citet=KK00]. Both surveys covered the entire southern sky by visual examination of survey photographs. The object of the other group was different, however: to find dwarf galaxy candidates in the entire Local Volume, well beyond the Local Group. They thus included objects smaller than our limit and applied slightly different standards of morphology. To a first approximation, however, any object meeting our standards also met theirs. The two surveys are independent, since neither used the results of the other in compiling their lists.

Our first task is to estimate N, the total number of objects visible on the southern survey plates meeting criteria common to both searches: of very low surface brightness, one to a few minutes of arc in size, not obviously ruled out by morphology nor by high radial velocity. Of these, our survey found n1 and the Karachentsev group n2. The probabilies of a given object being found by each group are then n1 / N and n2 / N, respectively. The number missed by us but found by the other group, m1, is the probability of our missing an object, times their probability of finding it, times the number of objects:

[formula]

So our estimate of the total number of objects is

[formula]

The next step is to determine these numbers.

Twenty-two objects were located by both groups. There are 29 objects found by the other group which they report as large enough (over a minute of arc in both dimensions) to fit our criteria and yet do not appear in our list. Of these, a review of Digital Sky Survey images and film copies of the Survey shows 12 too bright for us to record. A further five were rejected by us because their known radial velocities were too high for membership in the Local Group. Six are morphologically arguable, in that they didn't look like dwarf galaxies to us but did to the Karachentsev group. This leaves six objects meeting our selection criteria which we missed; add to these, say, half of the morphologically arguable objects, for a total of nine.

On the other hand, there are 37 objects in our survey not noted by the other group: 21 galaxies, ten reflection nebulae and six planetaries (leaving out the star cluster and the galaxy clusters). Pending a close comparison of search techniques and criteria no clear conclusions can be drawn about why these were missed. On the basis of our experience with survey films as opposed to plates, we suggest that some of the explanation might be due to the lower noise levels of the latter, allowing us to detect fainter objects. It is also probable that many, or all, of the 16 galactic objects were rejected on morphological grounds.

We use equation [\ref=eq:N] to calculate two cases: in the first, the non-galaxy objects missing from the Karachentsev group's listing but found by us are excluded (which would be the case, for example, if their morphological selection were perfect for these objects); in the second they are included. Thus n1 is 43 or 59, n2 is 31, and m1 is 9. These result in a total number of objects of 61 and 83, respectively, of which 43 and 59 have been found, leaving 18 or 24 objects still lurking on the plates.

Consider now that of the 43 or 59 objects examined, two have proven to be Local Group dwarfs, giving a conversion rate of .047 and .034. In each case we thus expect eight-tenths of a Local Group dwarf to remain among the objects on the plates.

Our overall estimate of Local Group dwarf galaxies remaining undiscovered in the southern sky, either hidden by the Milky Way or missed by two visual surveys, is thus about five.

Although some of the assumptions and numbers going into our numerical estimate are uncertain or arguable, the overall qualitative conclusion is very robust. Let us assume, for example, a very high conversion rate of faint objects to Local Group galaxies by including all eleven known in the south and dividing by the low estimate of 43 objects plus the nine known previously (which were not in our list). With this conversion rate of about one in five, the number of additional objects required to double the Local Group's census, say 36, comes out to 180. For this number of objects to exist on the plates and still remain unseen our survey would have had to miss almost three times as many objects as it found, of exactly the type we were looking for. The overlap with the other group's list would be expected to be about seven or eight, one-third of the actual overlap. And this is still not enough of an expansion of Local Group membership to agree with cosmological simulations.

Our estimate of completeness of course only takes into account those objects which fall within our search criteria. We think it quite reasonable to assume that all large, bright galaxies in the Local Group (outside the region hidden behind the Milky Way) have already been found. Our search was sensitive to dwarf galaxies as faint as any known. Nearby dwarfs could have remained hidden, if they were close and diffuse enough for their stars to be lost among the Milky Way foreground; however, the volume of space available for this is not big enough to hide many of them. Galaxies that are much more concentrated than any known, so that they fell below our size criterion; or conversely much less concentrated, so that their surface brightness fell below the plate limits, would be missed. Objects that did not have Giant Branch stars might not be seen, but that requires no star formation at all, or a strange sort which is not elsewhere seen.

Other Objects in the Catalog

There are a large number of Galactic reflection nebulae in our list. We attempted to avoid them by requiring any object to appear on both colors of survey plate, assuming that (blue) nebulae which are very faint on the blue plates would not appear at all on red plates. This is a reasonable assumption [\citep=WS86] and surely many were removed this way. However, apparently there are a range of colors among this kind of object and several were bright enough in the red to make it through.

Somewhat surprising are the galaxy clusters we found. These were not detected on the plate due to the concentration of galaxies, but rather due to a faint glow. Although this is generally centered on a dominant galaxy, it is very spread out and probably consists of intracluster stars not bound to any one galaxy.

As expected, several planetary nebulae were found near the Galactic plane. From their large apparent size and very low surface brightness, these must be either very old or heavily obscured (and in either case, rather close). Old planetaries are of particular interest due to their interaction with the interstellar medium [\citep=BSS90], though in these cases the very low surface brightness will make further study by spectroscopy difficult.

The majority of our objects are galaxies far beyond the Local Group. These come in a variety of shapes, with diffuse dwarfs predominating but face-on disk galaxies well-represented. In many cases the nuclei of the latter are actually rather bright, but appeared starlike on the survey plates and so were not obviously extragalactic.

In addition to the list of objects derived from our own examination of survey plates, we had the opportunity to investigate several which were suggested by other workers as possible or probable Local Group galaxies. None of these turned out to be in the Local Group (though a few are probably nearby). The basis for almost all of these suggestions was radial velocity; either a low value was taken to indicate Local Group membership, or a more elaborate model (as in [\citet=SB92]) was applied. Both procedures are invalid, of course, when the velocity data point is incorrect, as it is for most of these.

This fact should not be taken as indicating a high level of error in radial velocity catalogs. The few instances highlighted here of superimposed stars giving misleading velocities are taken from many thousands of measurements, and most of these have been corrected. (Superimposed Galactic stars will, of course, only give erroneously low radial velocities to distant galaxies.)

We do wish to point out, however, the danger of forming conclusions based on a single type of data. Errors will always creep in, and if there is no independent method of detecting them they will remain. Astronomy (especially cosmology) is necessarily dependent on datasets containing sparse data on many objects and so is particular subject to this problem. We urge, whenever possible, the combination of different types of data. In what is no doubt an extreme example, by simple imaging we have reduced the population assigned by [\citet=SB92] to the Local Group by roughly 20%.

A similar problem shows up in the cases of NGC 5237 and ESO 056G019. In each, the same radial velocity was taken to indicate quite different locations by different authors. Again, imaging was able to resolve the disagreement.

Further Investigations

The obvious next step in the Dwarf Hunt is to extend the search to the other half of the sky. A similar visual survey of the northern sky is now being performed using POSSII plates, and we expect to report the results from it in due course. In addition, the objects from the Karachentsev & Karachentseva group which conform to our criteria but did not appear in our list should be followed up.

Meanwhile, the objects here presented offer much scope for further study. Lines of inquiry from the Galactic (interaction of old planetary nebulae with the interstellar medium) to the cosmological (formation and evolution of large, distant low surface brightness galaxies) are represented. In particular there is useful work to be done on the resolved dwarf galaxies in the Local Volume.