Broken quantum symmetry and confinement phases in planar physics

Introduction

Planar quantum physics is known to exhibit many surprising properties like charge fractionalization, spin-charge separation, fractional and non-abelian statistics. Important analogies show up between apparently different systems like fractional quantum Hall systems and rotating bose condensates. Many of the special features are based on a subtle interplay between particles and their duals, e.g. between charges and fluxes, spins and vortices, particles and quasiparticles or defects. These features are often a consequence of topological interactions between the relevant degrees of freedom. From a mathematical point of view many of these aspects are related to nontrivial realizations of the braid group. The appearance of the braid group is linked quite generically to the presence of an underlying quantum symmetry described by a (quasi-triangular) Hopf algebra. Quantum groups naturally provide a framework in which abelian or non-abelian representations of the braid group can be constructed explicitly. Moreover, particles and their duals are treated on equal footing in this framework. As a result it is possible to give a systematic and detailed description of the spin and statistics properties of the relevant degrees of freedom.

The generic appearance and therefore importance of Hopf symmetries in two-dimensional systems provide a strong physical motivation for studying what happens to such systems if one of the (bosonic) fields acquires a vacuum expectation value which breaks the Hopf symmetry. How does a phase with broken Hopf symmetry manifest itself physically and how one can such phases be characterized? In the case of breaking of ordinary gauge symmetries one usually finds that masses for vector particles are generated and/or massless scalars show up. A further - and equally important - aspect of symmetry breaking is the impact on topological defects: some of them will disappear from the spectrum and new ones may show up depending on the properties of the order parameter [\cite=Bais:1981nn]. As we will show this is only the simplest case, with other and more complicated situations arising when dual (dis)order parameters - for example, the density of magnetic vortices - come into play [\cite=mandelconf] [\cite='tHooft:1977jd] [\cite=hooftconf].

In this paper we report on general results from the study of (dis)order parameters that carry representation labels of a Hopf algebra A. The (dis)order parameter breaks the Hopf symmetry to some Hopf subalgebra T. The analysis shows that the representations of T fall into two sets. One contains representations that get confined in the broken phase, while the other contains non-confined representations. The tensor products of T representations allow one to determine the "hadronic" composites that are not confined. The non-confined representations together form the representation ring of a smaller algebra U, which is the residual symmetry of the the effective low energy theory of non-confined degrees of freedom. We find that both confined and not confined representations can be electric, magnetic or dyonic in nature, depending on the type of (dis)order parameter one assumes is condensed. We have relegated an extensive mathematical treatment of these problems to a separate paper [\cite=baslsch], to which we refer the reader for more detailed statements and proofs.

Hopf symmetry

In this section we briefly summarize some essential properties of a Hopf algebra [\cite=chapress], choosing a relative simple class as an example. This class describes the symmetry that arises if one breaks for example a non-abelian continuous group G to a discrete subgroup H, giving rise to what is known as a discrete gauge theory [\cite=Bais:1980vd] [\cite=krausswil] [\cite=preskrauss] [\cite=dgt5]. Such a model contains magnetic defects which carry a flux labeled by a group element of H. The group H acts on fluxes by conjugation, so that fluxes in the same conjugacy classes form irreducible multiplets. If the group is non-abelian one finds that the fluxes, when parallel transported around each other, generate non-abelian Ahoronov-Bohm phases. The underlying Hopf symmetry in this case turns out to be the quantum double A  =  D(H) of the group H [\cite=dpr] [\cite=dgt1]. This double has more structure than the group H because [formula]. Here F(H) are the functions on the group and H is the group algebra of H (the linear span of group elements with the given group product). The symbol [formula] indicates that D(H) is the tensor product of F(H) and H but that the multiplication of two elements of D(H) is "twisted". Explicitly, the multiplication rule for two elements in D(H) is :

[formula]

Note that the product in the H-component is the ordinary group multiplication but that the pointwise multiplication of functions is twisted by the conjugation action of H. Physically, we think of H as the "electric" gauge group generated by [formula] while the F(H) component is a "magnetic symmetry" generated by [formula]. The unitary irreducible representations of D(H) are denoted by ΠAα. Here A is a a magnetic (flux) quantum number labeling a conjugacy class of H and α is an electric quantum number labeling a representation α of the centralizer NA of that conjugacy class. We see that the trivial class {e} (consisting of the unit element of H) gives the usual representations of H = N{e} corresponding to the purely electric states. Conversely the representations with the trivial α representations are the purely magnetic multiplets. At this point one should observe that the labeling of the dyonic (i.e. mixed) states already takes care of a well known subtlety, namely the obstruction to defining full H-representations in the presence of a non-abelian magnetic flux. D(H) has a trivial representation ε (the co-unit) defined by [formula]. There is a canonical way in which tensor product representations are defined, leading to a Clebsch Gordon series:

[formula]

The final ingredient is the R-matrix [formula] implementing the braid operation on a two particle state through

[formula]

where σ is the "flip" operation, interchanging the order of the factors in the tensor product. The R2 operator yields the monodromy, or generalized Ahoronov Bohm phase factor.

We note that Hopf symmetry plays a role in all planar systems that have a conformal field theory description, such as 2 dimensional critical phenomena, fractional quantum Hall states [\cite=MR] [\cite=SB], and the world sheet picture of string theory. In these systems the tensor product rules of the quantum group are directly related to the fusion rules of the chiral algebra of the conformal field theory. The (quasi)particle excitations carry representations of that quantum group and the same mathematical tools can be used to characterize the Hall plateau states and their excitations.

Hopf symmetry breaking

Let us imagine a condensate forming in a state |v〉 in the carrier space of some representation ΠAα. Then we may define the maximal Hopf-subalgebra T of A which leaves |v〉 invariant. Explicitly, elements P of T satisfy

[formula]

Given the original Algebra A there is a systematic way of calculating T. The most familiar example is the case where A is the group algebra of an ordinary group H. In that case one easily checks T is the group algebra of a subgroup of H, thus reproducing the well-known form of symmetry breaking. A first nontrivial case is A  =  F(H). In that case the algebra of functions on the group H gets broken to the algebra of functions on the quotient group H / K, where K is some normal subgroup of H (i.e. HKH- 1 = K).

Let us now take a closer look at the situation for A = D(H). If we break by a purely electric condensate |v〉∈Veα then the magnetic symmetry is unbroken but the electric symmetry H is broken to Nv, with Nv  ⊂  H the stabilizer of |v〉. In that case we get T = F(H)        Nv.

We may also break by a gauge invariant purely magnetic state. Interestingly enough one such a state exists for each conjugacy class and corresponds to an unweighted sum of the basis vectors representing the group elements in the class: [formula]. The group action of H leaves this state invariant:

[formula]

In this case one may show that the unbroken Hopf algebra is T  =  F(H / KA)H with KA  ⊂  H the subgroup generated by the elements of class A. This reduction of the symmetry reflects the physical fact that the fluxes can only be defined up to fusion with the fluxes in the condensate.

As a final example we consider what happens if the condensate corresponds to a single flux state |v〉  =  |g〉 with (g∈A). Now one finds T = F(H / KA)Ng with Ng  =  {h∈H|hg = gh}, showing that both electric and magnetic symmetry are partially broken.

Confinement

Consider now the physical situation after the breaking has taken place. As the ground state has changed we should discuss the fate of the (quasi)particle states belonging to the representations of the residual Hopf algebra T. These representations can be constructed and describe the excitations in the broken phase. Furthermore, there is a decomposition of representations of the algebra A into representations Ωj of T  ⊂  A. Now it may happen that the braiding of the condensed state |v〉∈V0 and some (quasi)particle state |p〉 in a representation Ωj is nontrivial. If this happens, the vacuum state is no longer single valued when transported around the (quasi)particle. Consequently the new ground state does not support a localized excitation of the type Ωj and will force it to develop a string-like singularity, i.e. a domain wall ending on it. Such a wall carries a constant energy per unit length and therefore the particle of type Ωj will be confined. The upshot is that we can use braid relations of the T representations Ωj with the ground state representation Π0 of A to determine whether or not the corresponding particles are confined. Physically speaking this procedure is like imposing a generalized Dirac charge quantization condition to determine the allowed non-confined excitations in a given phase. In general the determination of these braid relations of the T and A representations is a difficult problem. For detailed calculations we refer to our paper [\cite=baslsch]. It is also shown there that all T representations which have trivial braiding with the vacuum representation can survive as localized states in the broken phase.

Consistency requires that the non-confined representations should form a closed subset under the tensor product for representations of T. One may show that this is the case and that the subset of non-confined representations can in fact be viewed as the representations of yet another Hopf algebra U. Mathematically, U is the image of a surjective Hopf map

[formula]

The U symmetry characterizes the particle like representations of the broken phase. Under quite general circumstances U itself is again quasi-triangular, implying that it features an R-matrix which governs the braid statistics properties of the non-confined excitations in the broken phase. Returning to T, it is clear that the tensor product rules for confined T representations allow one to construct multi-particle composite ("hadronic") states which belong to non-confined representations.

For a complete characterization of the excitations in the broken phase we should comment on the strings attached to confined particles. These are not uniquely characterized by their endpoints because one can always fuse with non-confined particles. It turns out that the appropriate mathematical object characterizing the strings is the Hopf kernel Ker(Γ) of the Hopf map ([\ref=sur]).

To illustrate these concepts we return to the examples mentioned in the previous Section. The first example concerned a purely electric condensate which just breaks the electric gauge group to Nv so that, as mentioned, [formula]. One obtains [formula] and Ker(Γ) = F(H / Nv). Physically, this means that the only surviving representations are those which have magnetic fluxes corresponding to elements of Nv while the states with fluxes in the set H - Nv get confined. In short, partial electric breaking leads to a partial magnetic confinement. The distinct walls are now in one-to-one correspondence with the Nv cosets in H - Nv.

The second example had the gauge invariant magnetic condensate and we found that T = F(H / KA)H with KA  ⊂  H the subgroup generated by the elements of class A. In this case we find that U = D(H / KA) with Ker(Γ) = KA. Thus, only electric representations which are KA singlets survive while the others get confined. Partial or complete magnetic breaking will result in partial or complete electric confinement, depending on KA. The walls in this phase are labeled by the representations of KA.

Finally the pure flux condensate |g〉, which has T = F(H / KA)Ng, leads to a phase for which [formula] and [formula]. Here N̄g is the subgroup of H / KA which consists of the classes nKA with n∈Ng. In this case we have a breaking of magnetic and electric symmetry leading to a (partial) confinement of both. We do not discuss dyonic condensates here, not because of essential complications but rather because of notational inconveniences. The same analysis can be applied.

Conclusion

Field theories on a plane may contain (quasi-)particles with nontrivial topological interactions and braid statistics. Such systems often have a hidden quantum symmetry described by a Hopf algebra A. Representations of such algebras have the attractive feature that they treat ordinary and topological quantum numbers on equal footing.

In this letter we investigated what happens when such a Hopf symmetry A gets broken to a Hopf algebra T by a vacuum expectation value of some field carrying a representation of A. We showed that generically there is a hierarchy of three Hopf algebras A, T and U which play a role in this situation. The representations of T fall into two sets, one set being confined while the other is not. The latter can be interpreted as the representations of the Hopf subalgebra U which is the residual symmetry of the broken phase. The tensor product rules of T representations tell us also what the non-confined composites (i.e. the "hadronic" excitations) will be. The tools and methods described here enable one to analyze a wide variety of phases, each with its specific pattern of (partial) confinement properties, and the way these phases are linked.