Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Blackholes and Naked Singularities

Proposition Lemma Corollary Definition Remark Example

Introduction

The international Workshop on "Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Blackholes and Naked Singularities" took place at the Department of Mathematics of the Politecnico of Milano from 13 to 15 May 2004. Participation was restricted to 70 scientists due to organizational reasons. The workshop was attended by people coming from several different Countries. Sponsors of the conference were MIUR, SIGRAV and INdAM-GNFM. The workshop has been a fruitful occasion of scientific exchange between people interested in various aspects of blackhole theory, especially Thermodynamics and Gravitational Collapse - Cosmic Censorship. The main speakers, in alphabetical order, were: Hakan Andreasson (Göteborg), Fernando de Felice (Padova), Mauro Francaviglia (Torino), Valeri Frolov (Alberta), José Garcia (Madrid), Fabio Giannoni (Camerino), Pankay Joshi (Tata, Bombay), Jerzy Kijowski (Warsaw), Dietmar Klemm (Milano), Brien Nolan (Dublin), Luciano Rezzolla (Sissa, Trieste), Louis Witten (Cincinnati). Two sessions of contributed talks took place as well. Chairpersons of the session were Lorenzo Fatibene and Roberto Giambò. Proceedings of the Conference have now been e-published on the website of the Department , with a mirror copy on the SIGRAV website. Each paper is available free of charge following the links given below.

Contribution list

Invited speakers

Gianluca Allemandi, Lorenzo Fatibene, Marco Ferraris, Mauro Francaviglia, Marco Raiteri, Geometric Framework for Entropy in General Relativity

Hå kan Andréasson, Analytical and numerical results on the Einstein-Vlasov collapsing system

Ewa Czuchry, Jacek Jezierski, Jerzy Kijowski, Thermodynamics of black holes from the Hamiltonian point of view

Fernando de Felice, Gamma Ray Burst and Cosmic Time Machines

Valeri P. Frolov, Black holes in a spacetime with large extra dimensions

Fabio Giannoni, Non-linear o.d.e. techniques in gravitational collapse and Cosmic Censorship

Pankaj S. Joshi, Gravitational Collapse End States

Dietmar Klemm, Blackholes and singularities in string theory

José M. Martìn-Garcìa, Critical Phenomena and the global structure of the Choptuik spacetime

Brien Nolan, Singularity Strengths and Extendibility

Louis Witten, Canonical Quantization of Collapsing Dust

Contributed papers

Emanuele Berti, A walk in Wonderland: highly damped black hole quasinormal modes

Alexander Burinskii, Singular Strings in the Rotating Astrophysical Sources

Marco M. Caldarelli, On Supersymmetric Solutions of D  =  4 Gauged Supergravity

Roberto Casadio, Electromagnetic waves on dilatonic star backgrounds

Tapas Kumar Das, Transonic Black Hole Accretion as Analogue System

Tomohiro Harada, Spherically symmetric perfect fluid collapse in area-radial coordinates

Deborah Konkowski, Cassidi Reese, T.M. Helliwell, C. Wieland, Classical and Quantum Singularities of Levi-Civita Spacetimes with and without a Positive Cosmological Constant

Akihiro Ishibashi, On the stability of black holes and naked singularities in static spacetimes

Hideki Maeda, Takashi Torii, Tomohiro Harada, Horizon Instability: a Local Analysis

Daniele Malafarina, Physical Properties of the Sources of the Gamma Metric

Elizabeth Winstanley, Classical and thermodynamical aspects of black holes with conformally coupled scalar field hair

The whole Proceedings volume is available following