Giant enhancement of quantum decoherence by frustrated environments

, and H.  De  Raedt*

The interaction/bath dynamics is such that there is very little relaxation.

The system as a whole relaxes to some state (which may or may not be close to the ground state) and this state is a complicated superposition of the states of the central system and the environment.

The system as a whole relaxes to a state that is (to good approximation) a direct product of the states of the central system and a superposition of states of the environment. In this case there are two possibilities:

The central system does not relax to its ground state;

The central system relaxes to its maximally entangled ground state.

The maximum amount of entanglement strongly depends on the values of the model parameters Ω(α)i,j and Δ(α)i,j. For the case in which there is strong decoherence, increasing the size of the environment will enhance the decoherence in the central system (compare the curves of Fig. 1(a,b,c) and Fig. 4(d,e)). Keeping the size of the environment fixed, different realizations of the random parameters do not significantly change the results for the correlation and concurrence (right panel of Fig. 1). However, the range of random values Ω(α)i,j and Δ(α)i,j for which maximal entanglement can be achieved is narrow, as illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4. In Fig. 3 we compare results for the same type of Hint (Ising like) and the same type of He (anisotropic Heisenberg like), but with different values of the model parameters. In Fig. 4, we present results for different types of Hint and He. but for parameters within the same range.

Environments that exhibit some form of frustration, such as spin glasses or frustrated antiferromagnets, may be very effective in producing a high degree of entanglement between the two central spins, see Figs. 1-4.

Decoherence is most effective if the exchange couplings between the system and the environment are random (in a limited range) and anisotropic, see Figs. 3 and 4.

The details of the internal dynamics of the environment affects the maximum amount of entanglement that can be achieved [\cite=ourPRE], and also affects the speed of the initial relaxation (compare the curves of Fig. 3(b,c,d,e), Fig. 4(a,d) and Fig. 4(b,c)).

For the case in which there is strong decoherence, for the same He and the same type of Hint, decreasing the strengh of Hint will reduce the relaxation to the finial state, and the final state comes closer to the singlet state (compare the curves of Fig. 3(a,c) and Fig. 3(d,f)).