ABSTRACT

Introduction

The formation of cD galaxies are suggested to be occurring at the centre of rich galaxy clusters in which multiple merger of galactic members take place. The central region of the galaxy cluster Abell  407, is the most convincing and rare example of such a merger in the offing (Schneider et al.1982). This region, where a conglomeration of nine galaxies shrouded in a stellar halo is a typical case for studying the processes involved in such mergers. In this study we focus mainly on the morphology of the jet from the radio source 4C  35.06 hosted by the cluster Abell  407.

Radio and optical studies of the source 4C35.06

The low frequency maps from GMRT data show extended faint diffuse emission from the jet structure of 4C  35.06. The 610 MHz radio map shows a jet with helically twisted morphology and with a size estimate of approximately 250  kpc, closely resembling that of the well known microquasar SS  433 (Blundell and Bowler 2004). It points to the fact that the jet is precessing and that the basic processes in jet emission in the stellar scales is the same in galactic scales also(Fig-1(a)). Also there are no hot spots observed in the jet, indicating the continuous shifting of jet direction. The SDSS and 2MASS images show a faint galaxy coincident with the central region of the radio map with a positional accuracy of 1.5  (Fig-1(b)). Since powerful radio jets are observed to emanate only from massive elliptical galaxies, this observation seems to be very unusual. For this low luminous optical host, possibly majority of its stars might have been stripped off during the violent mergers, still retaining a massive black hole at the centre. Results and conclusion:The radio source 4C  35.06 hosts a precessing kpc scale jet similar to that of the microquasar SS  433, and is seen to be emanating from the faintest galactic member. 4C  35.06 underscores the paradigm that despite the vast difference in scales, jet phenomena in radio loud AGNs keep a striking similarity with that in microquasars.