In: L. Castell and O. Ischebeck (eds.), "Time, Quantum and Information (Essays in Honor of C. F. von Weizsäcker)," Springer, Berlin, 2003.

C. F. von Weizsäcker's Reconstruction of Physics: Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow

Holger Lyre

Philosophy Department, University of Bonn

Heisenberg ... hatte seine nichtlineare Spinorfeldtheorie auf die Voraussetzung der allgemeinen ... Quantentheorie und die Forderung der Poincaré-Gruppe und der Isospingruppe gegründet. Als ich ihn fragte, warum genau diese Gruppen, sagte er etwa: 'Das kann ich nicht mehr begründen. Mit einer Forderung muß man eben anfangen.' Ich fragte: 'Warum überhaupt Gruppen?' Er, etwa: 'Wenn man mit einer Forderung anfängt, dann ist Symmetrie der beste Anfang. Symmetrie ist schön, das wußte schon Platon. Darin drückt sich die zentrale Ordnung aus.' ... Ich aber blieb unbefriedigt. Mir schien, man solle eine rationale Behauptung wie die Geltung einer Symmetrie womöglich noch rational begründen. Meine Vermutung war: Symmetrie bedeutet die Trennbarkeit des jeweils untersuchten Gegenstandes vom Rest der Welt. ... Die Frage ist, ob man diesem Gedanken noch eine strengere Fassung geben kann.

C. F. von Weizsäcker (1992, p. 910)

The Origin: The Philosophy of Physics

Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker's thinking has always crossed the borders between physics and philosophy. Being a physicist by training he still feels at home in the physics community, as a philosopher by passion, however, his mind cannot stop thinking at the limits of physics. His physical ideas are based on the general conceptual and methodological preconditions of physical theories. The above quotation does indicate this: Heisenberg's hint on symmetry as a natural starting point for a physicist--even though already philosophically motivated by Plato--left Weizsäcker "dissatisfied." He even wanted to explore the reasons for the symmetries themselves.

Such a line of reasoning about the foundations of physics has brought Weizsäcker into an abstract program of a possible reconstruction of physics in terms of yes-no-alternatives, which he called "ur-theory." I shall start this paper with a review of the basic ideas of ur-theory: the definition of an ur and the connection between ur-spinors and spacetime (Sect. [\ref=yesterday]: "Yesterday"). I then go over to some of ur-theory's present borders: the construction of quantized spacetime tetrads and the difficulties to incorporate gravity and gauge theories (Sect. [\ref=today]: "Today"). It goes without saying that my brief review will be far from being complete--see in particular the developments presented in Castell et al. (1975-1986). In the last section (Sect. [\ref=tomorrow]: "Tomorrow") I shall discuss the possible prospects of ur-theory--partly with a view to modern quantum gravity approaches, but mainly in connection with its philosophical implications. Here, one of the crucial questions is, whether form, or, modern, information is an entity per se and what particular consequences this may have.

Yesterday: Urs, Spinors and Spacetime

Weizsäcker's first book on the philosophy of physics, Zum Weltbild der Physik, appeared in 1943 in its first edition--when his professional main concern still was 'real physics.' But already at this time his 'real interest' had shifted to the foundations of quantum mechanics. About ten years later, at a spa in Bad Wildungen in 1954, Weizsäcker had the crucial idea: the quantum theory of a binary alternative is the theory of objects in a three-dimensional space. Mathematically, he had just stumbled about the fact that SU(2), the quantum theoretical symmetry group of a binary alternative, is locally isomorphic to the three-dimensional rotation group SO(3) in Euclidean space. Philosophically, however, this was more "satisfying" than just to start with a certain symmetry, since now the symmetry itself was distinguished by the fact that it is the symmetry of the simplest logical object--a yes-no-alternative. Couldn't this be a reason for the three-dimensionality of position space?

Weizsäcker's approach rests on two main 'ingredients': firstly, the idea of reducing physics to binary alternatives and, secondly, the connection between spin structures and the structures of time and space. This second motive has caused David Finkelstein (1994) to subsume Weizsäcker's approach under the heading of "spinorism" and this will be my main concern in this and the following section. For a moment, however, we shall consider the first mentioned, rather philosophical ingredient. Here the idea is that--in its core--physics reduces to predicting measurement outcomes. Measurement outcomes may be restated in terms of empirically decidable n-fold alternatives, and, trivially, any n-fold alternative can be embedded into a (Cartesian) product of binary alternatives. Binary alternatives, in turn, can be considered as bits of information. Thus physics reduces to information or, more precisely, potential information.

Weizsäcker has called the empirically decidable binary alternatives in his reconstruction ur-alternatives (from the German prefix 'Ur-': 'original,' 'elementary,' 'pre-'). A bit whimsically, he later called them urs. Urs may be considered the fundamental objects in physics. As a matter of principle, any physical object can be built out of them. The reader may note that at this point an interesting conceptual shift has occurred. We started from the notion of information, a subjective notion in the first place, and applied it to the objective notion of a physical object. This is another way of saying that objects are reduced or even 'made out of' information. It seems that via this shift information has been gained the status of a substance. In the last section I shall indeed come back to this challenging formula, as our present working hypothesis, however, we will take an information-theoretic reductionist view of physics in the sense that physical objects are entirely characterized by the information which can be gained from them.

In quantum theory in particular, this view has a lot of plausibility. Quantum objects are represented in terms of their Hilbert state spaces, their quantum states correspond to empirically decidable alternatives. Any quantum object may further be de-composed or embedded into the tensor product of two-dimensional objects, nowadays called quantum bits or qubits. Urs, therefore, are in fact nothing but qubits (cf. Sect. [\ref=tomorrow]).

Weizsäcker's vision of the structure of physics as a quantum theory of ur-alternatives has its roots in the above mentioned fact that the essential symmetry group of urs, which is SU(2), is the double covering of the rotational symmetry group of three-dimensional position space. The guiding line is that, if the idea of urs as fundamental entities is true, the symmetry of such urs should play an essential role in the reconstruction of physics and in the phenomenology of our empirical world. And, of course, position space is probably the most essential feature of the empirical world!

But this only gives rise to spinorism in general, the mathematical motive of deriving the spacetime structure from a primarily given spin structure. A more precise ur-theoretic ansatz was chosen in Weizsäcker's 1958 papers Die Quantentheorie der einfachen Alternative (Komplementarität und Logik II)--internally called "KL II"--and the "Dreimännerarbeit" KL III together with Erhard Scheibe and Georg Süßmann. KL II starts from the well-known and deep connection between tensors and spinors: there always exists a mapping between tensors of order n and spinors of order 2n. A lightlike four-vector, in particular, can be written in terms of the Pauli matrices σμ as

[formula]

where uA is a spinor and dotted indices denote complex conjugate components. This relation highlights the link between the homogeneous Lorentz group SO(1,3) and [formula], the unimodular group in spinor space (the spinors do not obey a unitary norm here). But instead of elaborating the thus defined spin structure of Minkowski space, the focus of KL III lies on Weizsäcker's idea of "multiple quantization." Generally speaking, the procedure of quantization can be split into two steps: (i) the transition from a (classically) discrete number of degrees of freedom to infinitely many degrees, and (ii) the transition to operator-valuedness and, hence, appropriate commutation relations. Starting from a simple, classical yes-no-alternative aA, step (i) means the construction of a wavefunction φ(aA), i.e. a spinor [formula]. Relation ([\ref=kmu]) allows to transform uA  ⇔  kμ, then (ii) implies the transition kμ  →  μ. This is the 'first quantization' of a binary alternative. On the level of 'second quantization' wavefunctions φ(kμ) occur, where operators μ act upon. Interpreting kμ as energy-momentum four-vector, we get quantum mechanical wavefunctions ψ(xμ) in Minkowski space after Fourier transformation. The next, third level of quantizing ψ(xμ) corresponds to usual quantum field theory.

Weizsäcker, Scheibe and Süßmann discovered in their paper the Weyl and--after doubling the state space of urs and working with bi-spinors--the Dirac and Klein-Gordon equation and also the homogeneous Maxwell equations as algebraic identities! Since for a nullvector one obtains kμkμ  =  0, the massless Klein-Gordon equation follows for instance from

[formula]

Let [formula] be the fundamental representation of [formula] and [formula] its complex-conjugate, then the transition to bi-spinors effectively means to work with [formula]. I shall show in the next section how this combines with a proper usage of the full spin structure of urs.

We have so far presented ur-theoretic arguments to introduce Minkowski spacetime as a local spacetime model, we shall now go over to global spacetime considerations. We start again with a quantum theory of binary alternatives, but this time with usual quantum bits obeying a unitary norm. The symmetry group of urs then contains SU(2), U(1) and the complex conjugation. As a Lie group manifold, this yields

[formula]

Weizsäcker (1985) has made the far-reaching assumption--for which the above portrayed spinorism is just the motive--that [formula] itself should be considered a model of global cosmic space. It follows that urs are wavefunctions on [formula]. As Thomas Görnitz (1988) has shown, this leads to a remarkably fresh look at the large numbers in physics on the basis of the multiplicity of the regular representations of SU(2), in accordance with the Planck scale and Weizsäcker's earlier calculations. This will be explained in a moment. Moreover, for the appropriate treatment of global cosmic time and time in general, the distinction between past and future plays a major role in Weizsäcker's philosophy of physics. He considers it a very precondition of empirical science, on which the concept of separable alternatives has to be built. In my opinion it is therefore highly implausible to take U(1) as a model of cosmic time, which would be cyclic then. Obviously, time demands a special treatment (see, however, Castell 1975 for an opposite view). We now seek to calculate the number of urs, starting from Weizsäcker's early estimations in the 60's. As a wavefunction on global space, one ur can be thought of as the alternative of being in the 'one half' or the 'other half' of the universe. Suppose now we want to localize a nucleon in the universe. The Compton wavelength can be understood as a natural measure of localizing a certain particle. For a nucleon, the ratio between the cosmic radius R and the Compton wavelength λ is about 1040. We therefore have to decide 1040 alternatives in each spatial direction to localize that nucleon. Hence, in ur-theory the assumption is made that a nucleon is 1040 urs (up to two or three orders of magnitude). Accordingly, an electron is about 1037 urs.

The Compton wavelength λ of a nucleon is actually a distinguished measure of length. If we take the whole energy content of the universe to subdivide space into equal intervals, then λ drops out. In this sense it is indeed an elementary length. We may of course measure up smaller regions of space, but then, as a matter of principle, do we loose the possibility to perform measurements of other regions at the same time with the same accuracy. In this sense the number of elementary spatial cells, which is [formula], is the total number of elementary "events" in the world and, thus, the total number of urs (the one bit decision whether, for instance, a particular cell is occupied by a nucleon). Accordingly, the dimension of the Hilbert space of urs is 210120. As a result, not as an input, Weizsäcker got the number of nucleons as [formula]--in accordance with empirical results!

As already mentioned, Görnitz has refined these estimations and put them on a more solid, group-theoretical basis. He considered the regular representation of SU(2), i.e. the representation in terms of square-integrable functions of the Hilbert space [formula] on SU(2) itself as a homogeneous space [formula]. The multiplicity of the irreducible representations of the reduced tensor product of spin-[formula]-representations of SU(2) shows a characteristic cut-off at functions with a wavelength of the order [formula], where R is the radius of [formula] and N the number of ur-functions (cf. Görnitz 1988 for details). Obviously, lo is now the lower bound of spatial distances which can be measured in a cosmos with N urs at maximum. lo is indeed a fundamental elementary length in the sense that it represents the smallest spatial resolution physically possible. Remarkably, from the above N = 10120 we get lo = 10- 60R, i.e. the Planck length! Conversely, if we already know about the Planck scale from other considerations (as we usually do), we get N = 10120 as a result--in accordance with Weizsäcker's original, more hand-waving estimations.

Today: Tetrads, Gravity and Gauges

In the preceding section we have discussed the possibility of introducing spacetime from an ur-hypothesis and also deriving the form of the basic equations for matter fields (mainly the Dirac equation) and the simplest free interaction field (the homogeneous Maxwell equations). From a broader perspective two questions arise: Shouldn't the ur-theoretic ansatz, a way of deriving spacetime itself, directly lead to gravity (or, perhaps, even quantum gravity)? Shouldn't we be able to derive interaction gauge theories in general? Ambitious questions, indeed, but it is perhaps not astonishing that in abstract accounts like ur-theory questions like these arise at the very beginning. And despite of their ambitious character and also far from really answering them I try to discuss in the following some possible ways to tackle these questions.

As a working hypothesis, let us, again, take [formula] as a model of global position space. Urs can be understood as non-local functions on SU(2) and do naturally represent a spinor dyad (with spinors uA, vA satisfying uAvA  =    -  vAuA  =  1). It is now well-known that a spinor dyad is equivalent to a null-vector vierbein or tetrad, where the four null-vectors have the form ([\ref=kmu]), but consist of mixed combinations of uA and vA (the details of this and the following paragraph can be found in Lyre 1998b). By considering suitable linear combinations of the null-vectors, such a null-tetrad can generally be written in real-valued form θαμ = (tμ,xμ,yμ,zμ), where the space-like vectors xμ,yμ,zμ represent a spatial dreibein tangent to [formula] together with an orthogonal time-like vector tμ. The interesting point is that, since the tetrad is written in terms of ur-spinor components, a (first) quantization of urs also induces a quantization of the tetrad. Such a quantized ur-tetrad, however, means nothing but quantized coordinates in our spacetime model.

As a remarkable of the quantized ur-tetrad it turns out that the time operator μ in is just the ur-number operator [formula] in the Fock space of Bose urs. This is consistent with Weizsäcker's assumption that the growth of the total number of urs is a measure of temporal cosmic evolution. Now, since the number operator has indeed a lower bound at zero, the global spacetime model [formula] with a time parameter manifold [formula] seems justified (thus avoiding globally closed time-like curves as mentioned in Sect. [\ref=yesterday]).

Can all this give us a hint how to describe (quantum) gravity in ur-theory? We may think of θαμ as representing four vector bosons, i.e. massless 'gravitons' with spin 1 and get a corresponding wave equation [formula] analogous to ([\ref=KG]). This could perhaps describe the gravitational field in non-standard form (i.e. not as a spin-2 field) in the linearized limit. However, what we are really looking for is a recipe to make this field dynamical and couple it to matter. This was actually a main disadvantage of KL III. The theory of the free Maxwell field followed from the fact that [formula] consists of a spin-1 triplett and a spin-0 singulett, where the former can be written in terms of an anti-symmetric tensor with the algebraic properties of Maxwell's field strength tensor. Even if we grant this as a 'derivation' of Maxwell's free theory, and even if we have also obtained Dirac's equation as a free matter field theory, the dynamical coupling of both fields is still missing.

Today, the usual recipe of coupling matter and interaction fields is the gauge principle. The idea is to start from a global symmetry of the free matter field theory and then to postulate the corresponding local symmetry as well. The geometrical picture is that of a fiber bundle over spacetime, where the fibers are represented by the local symmetry group. It thus turns out that the inhomogeneous term in the covariant derivative (i.e. covariant under local gauge symmetry transformations) has the interpretation of a bundle connection. A word of caution, however: most textbooks present the connection coupling term as a genuine way to introduce a real physical field. But this is certainly an overestimation of a mere symmetry requirement! The appearence of a connection only adjustes the postulate of local gauge symmetry, the connection itself must still be considered flat, i.e. with vanishing bundle curvature. A true physical interaction field requires non-vanishing curvature and hence non-flat connections, but these are clearly not enforced by the logic of the gauge principle. Local gauge transformations must be understood as a mere change in the position representation of the wavefunction and are thus physically vacuous. The situation is analogous to choosing curvilinear coordinates in flat space (which leads to Christoffel symbols, i.e. connections, but no gravitational field, i.e. non-vanishing curvature). Therefore, one needs a true physical input to generally justify the connection term as non-flat. In general relativity this input is the equivalence principle. It has been argued that one possible way to establish the connection term as a real coupling term could be a generalization of the equivalence principle by introducing generalized 'inertial' and 'field charges' (Lyre 2000). Whatever this physical input may be, in the following I will understand the gauge principle already in such a stronger, truly physical sense.

Now, a gauge theory is characterized by a certain gauge group. One nice starting point for an ur-theoretic gauge theory of gravity could be the fact that the quantized ur-tetrad generates a group which itself could be used as a proper gauge group. It can be shown that the Lie algebra of the ur-tetrad operators is 12-dimensional and that the corresponding Lie group is isomorphic to [formula]. Whether and how this group can be used for a proper gauge approach is still an open question. One interesting point to be mentioned is that the operators of this algebra "live" in flat Minkowski spacetime (in ur-theory this is reflected by unimodular groups rather than unitary ones). As in many other gauge approaches of gravity we would therefore describe the gravitational field in a flat space--and perhaps in this sense it is indeed just a local field as other Yang-Mills fields. But the point is that in ur-theory it will nevertheless be possible to have a global spherical model of the cosmos, since we got global curvature right from the beginning by taking [formula] as the cosmic model.

Tomorrow: Qubits, Holographic Principle and the Ontology of Information

In this last section I shall come back to the more philosophical issues of ur-theory. In Sect. [\ref=yesterday] we already noticed that, ontologically speaking, information in ur-theory seems to gain the status of a modern notion of substance. Two questions are simply unavoidable then: Does information exist without a carrier? Does information exist without an observer or information-gathering system?

Again, the very idea of ur-theory is to characterize physical objects entirely by the information which can be gained from them. The further, novel feature is that even space or spacetime is reconstructed here as a mere device to represent information. By the time Weizsäcker proposed it, this was a revolutionary new perspective. Nowadays, in modern quantum gravity, there is a strikingly similar discussion about the deeper connections between space and information, which has its roots in the considerations of black hole entropy. In the early days, black holes were thought of as characterized by three quantities only: mass, angular momentum and charge ("no hair"-property). But this in turn means that we could use them as 'entropy graves' by simply feeding them with the products of high entropy processes. This caused Jakob Bekenstein (1973) to attribute thermodynamical properties to black holes. In particluar, the surface of the event horizon A in Planck units turns out as a suitable measure of the entropy content

[formula]

thus leading to a generalized second law of thermodynamics.

Formula ([\ref=SBH1]) is in many respects quite remarkable. As Gerard 't Hooft (cf. his 2001) has pointed out, it does characterize physical objects on the most fundamental level not by the three-dimensional volume they occupy in space, but by a 'projection' of their degrees of freedom on a two-dimensional area much like a hologram. He thus calls this idea the holographic principle. From an ur-theoretic point of view, it is rather the characterization of physical objects in terms of pure information, which becomes evident here. Indeed, if we calculate the entropy and, hence, information content of the whole universe in Planck lengths, we get Su  ≈  (1060)2  =  10120 bits. In the same way we get [formula] bits for a nucleon--hence, the ur-numbers Weizsäcker already found in the 60's! For an electron, however, ([\ref=SBH1]) leads to [formula] in contrast to the 1037 urs stated in Sect. [\ref=yesterday].

Another calculation may suffice (cf. Görnitz 1988). Suppose spherical symmetry A = 4πR2 and the Schwarzschild radius R = 2M, then ([\ref=SBH1]) transforms to

[formula]

Again, for the whole universe Mu  =  1060mo we get Su  =  10120 bits as above. The information content of a particle with mass m then actually is the entropy difference of a universe with or without such a particle, and hence

[formula]

We now get Sn  ≈  1040 and Se  ≈  1037 in accordance with the results from Sect. [\ref=yesterday]. It seems therefore that ur-theory does not directly support the view of the holographic principle--and perhaps this could be a helpful insight for other programs as well.

Indeed, the relevance of the Bekenstein entropy has been acknowledged and partially explained in modern quantum gravity programs--in string theory as well as in the quantum loop approach (cf. Rovelli 1998b). Weizsäcker's explanation--historically the first--is a further alternative. The Ashtekar-inspired, canonical quantum loop approach has indeed some core similarities with ur-theory. Like Penrose's twistor approach, quantum loop gravity has its most suitable representation in terms of spin networks. It is certainly the most powerful among the spinoristic programs today, whose key feature is that they are background-free. Of course, all of the programs mentioned are mathematically by far more elaborated than ur-theory, which merely is an outline or perhaps a raw framework of a spinoristic theory. The true advantage of Weizsäcker's approach is rather its philosophical underpinning--and this may also serve other programs.

To explore the implications of a true ontology of information in physics, consider equation ([\ref=SBH2]) again. It indeed highlights the ur-theoretic view that energy-matter is information. In a future quantum gravity, formula ([\ref=SBH2]) might obtain the same status as Einstein's E = mc2, which indicates the ontological equivalence of energy and matter. However, would this suffice to consider information as a substance? Surely, the age-old distinction between matter and form lurks behind this question. Aristotle considered a (physical) object a synholon that is a composition of form (eidos) and matter (hyle). Form comes into matter, but none of these can exist independently, as far as physical objects are concerned. For Aristotle the essence of a thing is its form, the collection of all the attributes characterizing the object completely. In modern terms: the total information which can be gained from it. Nevertheless Aristotle insisted in the necessity of matter. He claimed the existence of a prote hyle, a "first matter" as a kind of a neutral, universal substance. The prote hyle is nothing we can specify any further, any form is stripped off from it. It does therefore not belong to the realm of physics, but can be considered the hypokeimenon of form--that on which form is based. Such a concept is clearly a pure metaphysical one and whether we like to make demands on it lies per definitionem beyond physics. What can empirically be known about an object, is per se reducible to information and in this sense physics indeed reduces to information. Perhaps, ur-theory is just the most rigorous anccount to take this insight seriously.

So far, information has been treated in an absolute sense. However, from a conceptual point of view the notion of information is inherently a context-related, relative concept presupposing semantics (cf. Lyre 2002). As Weizsäcker has put it: information does only exist in relation to the difference of two semantical levels. E.g. the sign H on a sheet of paper has its 'meaning' as the eighth letter of the Latin capital alphabet or the seventh of the Greek; but it may also mean just a collection of ink molecules. To specify a particular amount of information, a certain semantics must be presupposed, absolute numbers of information are 'meaningless.'

From this point of view the above derived ur and, hence, bit numbers appear as highly questionable. Under which "context" do they fall? How could one specify the semantics of physical objects? Actually, the idea of (context-) "relatedness" in physics is not at all a new one, relativity theory heavily relies on it. In ur-theory, the generators of the Poincaré group (cf. Castell 1975 and Weizsäcker 1985, p. 407) create and annihilate urs. Quite naturally, then, the information content of a physical state becomes a frame-dependent statement. This even applies to the information content of the universe. We may think of the 10120 bits of the world or its age of 1060 Planck times in relation to observers in the rest-frame of the cosmos only. Proponents of certain quantum gravity approaches, as for instance Carlo Rovelli (1997), advocate that only an extreme relationalist view of space and time holds--as far as general covariance in general relativity and its consequences in quantum gravity are concerned. Ur-theory partially supports this view. On the other hand, there is no other system left outside the universe. Thus, the information content of the universe has an 'absolute' meaning in an operational sense. It is therefore not clear to me whether it makes sense to tackle cosmology in a rigorous generally covariant manner, where there is no distinguished observer left. Operationally we are distinguished as inner observers of the universe with respect to its rest-frame. In ur-theory the cosmic model is therefore not derived as a solution of a certain set of basic equations, but as the epitome of the existence of observers and physical objects in spacetime itself: the representation of one ur. Global cosmic spacetime should perhaps be treated significantly different than local considerations.

Heisenberg's saying that there is no physics left, if we leave aside the possibility of any observers at all, does apply here, too. It was originally intended as a comment on the quantum measurement problem, not on problems about global spacetime. Ur-theory combines both meanings: urs are essentially quantum wavefunctions of the cosmos--"cosmic qubits" so to speak. The relevance of the observer as a 'device' whose factual observation 'creates' the observed thing is in ur-theory both supported from a rigorous quantum as well as information theoretic basis. As we already indicated in Sect. [\ref=yesterday], the ur as a qubit represents potential information. Measurements must be understood as transitions from potential to actual information. The upshot is that indeed the world only comes into being for measuring observers--not for them as particular individuals, but for the idea and possibility of such observers in general. Kant would have called this the transcendental subject. In my view it is the unavoidable epistemological consequence of a fundamental physics of quantum information, and, eventually, the philosophy of physics presumably has to deal with questions of this sort.

Our speculations have come to a certain end now. Perhaps I was able to support a bit the view that ur-theory is an account which allows for challenging considerations on fundamental questions of physics and the philosophy of physics, questions which are not even touched upon within the mainstream. As a physical program, ur-theory surely suffers from mathematical elaboration as compared to other programs and does therefore not even earn the name "theory" in a strict sense. But it is still highly impressing that Weizsäcker had his main starting ideas already at a time, when other programs were far from being born. The main ingredients of ur-"theory"--information and spinorism--do exist as central motives in modern approaches as well (as pointed out in the above). Perhaps the future development may lead to a mutual stimulation between other programs and the ur-hypothesis--at any rate this is what I wish Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker from the heart.

References