"Fragmentation" is a very general term used in the study of star formation (SF) and the interstellar medium (ISM) that describes the sequential breakup of a diffuse and extended mass of gas (the ISM) into ever smaller regions (clouds, clumps, cores), ultimately leading to the formation of stars. Although a single term is used to describe this iterative process, it most likely comprises a variety of physical mechanisms operating at the various levels of the sequence. The study of fragmentation thus represents an attempt to acquire a unified view of the formation of structures in the ISM, with star formation as its last step. A session on this topic therefore naturally belongs in this conference.

In order to properly discuss fragmentation, it is probably best to first make an attempt at formulating practical definitions of what we mean by this and a few other related terms. First, let us define a "structure" within the ISM as a connected region having specific values (or ranges of values) of the physical variables, with at least some of them clearly distinguishable from their values in the surroundings of the region. "Fragmentation" can then be defined as the formation of small-scale structures within a larger-scale one. This immediately implies that fragmentation is a multi-scale process, because it involves at least the scales of the "parent" and "daughter" structures. In particular, interstellar clouds (either HI or molecular) are essentially high-density structures embedded within larger-scale, lower-density ones. It is of course possible that, by either the same mechanism that formed them, or a different one, the small-scale structures fragment into even smaller structures, the process then being termed hierarchical, with many possible levels of fragmentation.

In the ISM, we can recognize a large hierarchy of structures including, from larger to smaller scales, spiral arms (of sizes L  ~   10 kpc), "superclouds" (L  ~   1 kpc, n  ~  1 cm- 3) (Elmegreen & Elmegreen 1983), giant molecular clouds (GMCs) (L  ~   50 pc, n  ~  50 cm- 3), "individual" molecular clouds (MCs) (L  ~  5 pc, n  ~  103 cm- 3), clumps (L  ~   0.5 pc, n  ~  104 cm- 3) and cores ([formula] pc, n  >  104 cm- 3) (see, e.g., the reviews by Blitz 1993; Elmegreen 1993). Note, however, that, although it is only human to classify and categorize, the above "categories" really appear to merge into one another, the ISM most likely really being a continuum (see the review by Vázquez-Semadeni et al. 2003 and references therein; also, the contribution by de Avillez in this session), with structures spanning all of the aforementioned range of scales. This contrasts with the traditional multi-phase view of the ISM (Field, Goldsmith & Habing 1969; McKee & Ostriker 1977).

It is interesting to compare the contents of this session with those of earlier reviews on the subject (e.g., Scalo 1985; Elmegreen 1993). Such a comparison shows that great progress has been made through the use of numerical simulations of the turbulent ISM, allowing a deeper understanding and an ever more quantitative determination of the role of stellar-driven turbulence in shaping the ISM (see, e.g., the review by Vázquez-Semadeni (2002), and the contributions by de Avillez and Sarson et al.), as well as the interiors of molecular clouds, and in controlling various aspects of the SF process (see the review by Ballesteros-Paredes and the contribution by Klessen).

The physical mechanisms operating at the various hierarchical levels of density structure formation in the ISM include a) the gravitational (Jeans 1902), thermal (Field 1965; Field, Goldsmith & Habing 1969; Pikel'ner 1968) and Parker (1966) linear instabilities, or combinations thereof (Elmegreen 1991, 1994); b) random compressions in the globally turbulent ISM, and c) the nonlinear development of the instabilities themselves.

Specifically, the gravitational instability, parhaps aided by cooling, is thought to be responsible for the formation of the largest structures, or "superclouds" (see, e.g., the review by Elmegreen 1993), although the Parker instability may also contribute at these scales (Franco et al. 2002). Within these, GMCs may be originated by a) gravitational instability, again aided by cooling, within their parent superclouds (e.g., Elmegreen 1993, 1994; Wada & Norman 1999); b) magneto-Jeans instabilities or modified swing amplification (e.g., Kim & Ostriker 2001), and c) large-scale turbulent motions driven by stellar activity (Ballesteros-Paredes, Vázquez-Semadeni & Scalo 1999; de Avillez 2000; de Avillez; see also the review by Mac Low 2002). Early cloudlet coagulation models (Oort 1954; Kwan 1979) are apparently not anymore considered as a viable GMC formation mechanism (Elmegreen 1990), as neither is the Parker instability (Kim, Ryu & Hong).

Regardless of their formation mechanism, GMCs, and the "individual" molecular clouds inside them, are supersonically turbulent themselves (see, e.g., the review by Blitz 1993 and references therein), while being magnetized and roughly isothermal, with approximate equipartition between the turbulent and magnetic energies (e.g., Myers & Goodman 1988). Thus, numerical simulations of MHD isothermal turbulent flows should constitute good models of molecular clouds. However, in this case, besides the structure-formation mechanism at work, an important parallel question is what is the driving mechanism for the turbulence at every scale, and how ubiquitous it is. This question arises because recent numerical results have shown that the turbulence, left undriven, decays rapidly, roughly in a large-scale crossing time at the large-scale velocity dispersion (Padoan & Nordlund 1999; Mac Low et al. 1998; Stone, Gammie & Ostriker 1998).

A possible driving mechanism for the turbulence in molecular clouds is dynamical ("bending mode") instabilities (Vishniac 1994) in the compressed layers between converging flows, as in the simulations of Hunter et al. (1986), Walder & Folini (1998) and Koyama & Inutsuka (2002). It is important to note that these instabilities appear to be enhanced by the presence of cooling, so that the formation of turbulent molecular clouds at temperatures of a few tens of Kelvins out of converging streams diffuse gas with T > 100 K appears particularly likely. Although this process has not been explicitely looked for in multi-scale simulations of the ISM, the adaptive-grid, high resolution simulations presented by de Avillez in this session hold great promise for identifying it. In the meantime, his contribution discusses the relative values of the thermal and magnetic pressures in the various temperature and density regimes of the ISM. Other contributing driving mechanisms for the turbulence may be the variation of the background UV radiation, which induces mass flux among the warm and cool stable phases of the ISM (Kritsuk & Norman 2002) and the "drag instability" found and discussed by Gu, Lin & Vishniac.

Within molecular clouds, the formation of their clumps and cores appears most likely a consequence of the supersonic turbulence within the clouds, as it appears to have a dominant role in their overall energy balance (corresponding to the standard notion that molecular clouds are in general "supported" against their self-gravity by the turbulent kinetic energy). Moreover, since stars form in dense molecular cloud cores, it is at this level of the fragmentation hierarchy that we have reached the connection to star formation (SF). However, if clumps and cores are density fluctuations produced by the supersonic turbulence in molecular clouds, it is natural to ask whether such a turbulent origin is compatible with the standard model of star formation (Mouschovias 1976; Shu 1977; Shu, Adams & Lizano 1987), in which clumps and cores forming low mass stars are assumed to be in quasi-magnetostatic equilibrium, and evolving on long time scales, given by the ambipolar diffusion characteristic time. This long contraction time scale is at the basis of the low SF efficiency (SFE) in the standard model.

In recent years, a new model has been emerging, which attempts to understand such issues as the properties of molecular cloud cores, the efficiency of star formation, and even the stellar initial mass function (IMF) as a consequence of the global parameters of the turbulence in molecular clouds (Padoan 1995; Padoan & Nordlund 2002; Vázquez-Semadeni, Ballesteros-Paredes & Klessen 2003; see also the reviews by Vázquez-Semadeni et al. 2000, Mac Low & Klessen 2003, and Ballesteros-Paredes). In this model, the low SFE is a consequence of global (large-scale) turbulent support for the clouds, together with local (small-scale) collapse induced by the compressible turbulence itself, in a sort of turbulent "colander". Thus, only a small fraction of the mass in a molecular cloud can proceed to gravitational collapse, while the rest is probably dispersed in a few turbulent crossing times, due to both stellar activity and the excess turbulent energy. This latter process necessarily requires simulations of the ISM at large, in which clouds can be adequately simulated as open systems (see, e.g., the review by Vázquez-Semadeni 2002 and references therein, and the contributions by de Avillez and Sarson et al.). In particular, Sarson et al. show promising results towards understanding the SF rate as a function of the mean gas density (the "Schmidt law") in the ISM directly from numerical simulations.

Thus, while in the standard model the low SFE is the result of a long evolution time scale for each core, in the turbulent model it is a statistical issue, because most of the mass in a molecular cloud is supported against collapse by the turbulence, with most cores being transient, and only a small fraction of the mass being in collapsing cores. It is a task of the emerging theory to determine how this fraction is determined by the global turbulent parameters. The contribution by Ballesteros-Paredes reviews the accomplishments of numerical simulations of MC turbulence in producing realistic cores, and the present state of the developing theory, as well as some shortcomings. Further results of the turbulent model on the resulting mass spectra of the collapsed object in turbulent clouds are given by Klessen, on the basis of "smoothed particle hydrodynamics" (SPH) numerical simulations. A promising numerical code for extending SPH to the magnetic case is presented by Price & Monaghan.

Observationally, the contribution by Crutcher makes an attempt at discerning between the two models, concluding that both turbulence and magnetic fields are important in MCs and SF, but finding that the presently availbale evidence is still insufficient to discern between the competing models. The contributions by Lai, Velusamy & Langer and by Wolf, Launhardt & Henning present magnetic field determinations using interesting novel techniques. As mentioned by Crutcher, a large database of this kind of measurements is needed in order to provide solid observational constraints as to which model better describes the star formation process as a part of the hierarchical fragmentation sequence from the largest scales in the ISM.

All in all, the contents of this session reflect the exciting advances of recent years in both observations and theoretical understanding of the hierarchical structure in the ISM and the SF process, and point towards the necessary steps for the future.