A Possible Mechanism for Generating a Small Positive Cosmological Constant

Recent observations of type Ia supernovae [\cite=a] and the cosmic microwave background power spectrum [\cite=b] have led to the consensus that there is dark energy giving a contribution of Ω  ~  0.7 or [formula] to the total energy density of the Universe. This dark energy can be identified with a positive cosmological constant, Λde, by ρde  =  Λde   /   8πGN. Λde is very small on any energy scale in fundamental physics, being roughly 10- 122 in Planckian units. It is a challenge to explain this observation [\cite=c], particularly without recourse to anthropic arguments, and using the only quantum theory of spacetime and particle physics available, namely string theory. Attempts to understand this problem are hindered by several events in the history of the Universe where a vacuum energy that is like a cosmological constant is expected to be generated. As the Universe evolves, there are stages of its thermal history where vacuum energy becomes important. During the inflationary epoch perhaps Λ  ~  m2unif, with the unification mass scale munif being [formula]. Later supersymmetry breaking is expected to generate Λ  ~  m2susy, with [formula] At the electroweak transition one expects to find Λ  ~  m2ew, with the electroweak scale being roughly [formula] Lastly, there is the QCD confinement transition with Λ  ~  m2QCD, with [formula] All of these scales are very much larger than the scale observed for Λde. The cosmological constant problem(s) require solving at least three logically separate but probably related issues: (1) The quantum fluctuation contribution to the energy density [formula] must be reduced so that it is at or below ρde. (2) The various vacuum energy contributions need to be similarly dealt with. (3) A residual of order [formula] needs to be explained.

A precursor of our approach is the paper of Yokoyama [\cite=d], who studied the ground state of a theory with two degenerate vacua mixed by instanton effects, assuming the cosmological constant vanished in the absolute ground state. We were stimulated by this treatment of degenerate vacua to consider what would happen in string theory. Meanwhile, a number of quite different and interesting analyses of the cosmological constant problem have appeared in recent years and while we have been obtaining the results we describe, [\cite=e], [\cite=suss], [\cite=feng], [\cite=BP].

We will formulate our approach in terms of a compactified string theory, and assume the compact manifold is Calabi-Yau. This is particular limit of M-theory rather than being general, and of course we do not yet know whether this is nature's choice. If this approach indeed leads to progress in understanding the cosmological constant problem(s) there are two possibilities. Either the approach can be generalized to other limits of M-theory, or it is evidence that the compactification is on Calabi-Yau manifolds. Since we compactify on a Calabi-Yau space, the effective four-dimensional cosmological constant is expected to be zero before supersymmetry breaking, [\cite=f]. Our approach has the advantage of allowing softly broken N = 1 supergravity to appear in four-dimensions coupled to matter. The precise nature of the matter is determined by the properties of the Calabi-Yau space. Each topologically distinct Calabi-Yau space has a large moduli space. The absence of massless scalars in nature means that quantum corrections must have arisen that break the moduli space up into isolated points by the introduction of some potential V. V can have many isolated degenerate minima at Vmin corresponding to many possible physical vacuum states. However, Vmin must be above, or at, the vacuum energy density in the phase where supersymmetry is unbroken, so that compactification of a Calabi-Yau space implies that all minima are such that Vmin  ≥  0. Extensive discussion of such a potential has recently been given by Douglas, [\cite=g]. An expansion of V about a minimum is typically taken to be the usual low-energy supersymmetry breaking superpotential, with only a finite potential barrier between the various possible vacuum states. A difficulty in making contact with phenomenology relates to the number of possible vacuum states N. N is thought to be enormous with estimates that range from ≥  1012, [\cite=h] to perhaps more than 10138, [\cite=g]. The essential thing to keep in mind is that we probably live in the ground state of the complete potential, or at least a very low-lying long-lived state, and the properties of our world are determined by being in this state and not by the properties of any of the string vacua that might arise in any particular compactification scheme. This comes about because in systems with large numbers of minima of V, although classically one might live in a single one of these minima, in quantum mechanics the true eigenstate of the Hamiltonian has a wavefunction that is large near many of these minima. This phenomenon is well established and is responsible for the band structure of solids. Thus it may well be that the true cosmological constant is small in the ground state even though it is large if calculated perturbatively about any single string vacuum, as we argue here.

Our argument is basically that mixing of N degenerate string vacua by normal quantum mechanical level repulsion leads to a ground state with energy density of order the initial one divided by N. The first thing we need to do is to make an estimate of how much the lowest level is decreased as a function of the number of connected vacua. We use a simple one-dimensional quantum mechanical model to illustrate this point. Consider a particle of mass m moving in a periodic potential of unit period with V(x) = V0(1  -  cos(2πx))  /  2. This potential has minima at x = n for any integer n. The bottom of each potential well looks very much like that of a simple harmonic oscillator of angular frequency [formula]. If there was just one such minimum, then one would expect the ground state energy to be roughly ω  /  2. However, the true quantum mechanical ground state of this system does not occur when the particle's wavefunction is concentrated at the bottom of one of the wells, but rather, by virtue of Bloch's theorem, one which is non-vanishing in each of the minima of the potential. The result is that the highly degenerate initial state is replaced by a band of energies. One can calculate the allowed energy band by the traditional method of solving the Schrödinger equation. However this problem can also be appoximately solved by using instanton methods. Consider a set of states |n〉 that are simple harmonic oscillator ground states of the particle at the minima x = n. The true eigenstates of the Hamiltonian are Bloch waves, eigenstates of the translation operator. A trial Bloch state wavefunction can then be written as

[formula]

where 0 < θ < 2π, or equivalently theta vacua in the instanton literature. Since [formula], [formula] Consider the matrix element [formula], where H is the Hamiltonian. As the Euclidean time parameter T becomes large, [formula] where E(θ) is the energy of the lowest Bloch wave labeled by θ. Were our trial state to contain any other eigenstates of the Hamiltonian with higher values of the energy, by taking the limit as T  →    ∞   their contributions would be suppressed relative to ground state energy, so E(θ) in this limit is precisely the ground state energy.

The instanton method [\cite=i] basically involves rewriting this expression as [formula] In this sum, the matrix element [formula] would vanish unless [formula] if the Hamiltonian really were a series of isolated simple harmonic oscillator potentials. But the real Hamiltonian will allow the possibility of a particle localized at x = n to tunnel through to x = n  ±  1. This barrier penetration problem can be solved by the WKB method and results in 〈n  ±  1|e- HT / |n〉  ~  〈n|e- HT / |n〉KTe- S0  /   where S0 is usually called the instanton action. If one chooses the + ( - ) sign in this expression, it is usually referred to as the (anti)-instanton contribution. A convenient way of thinking of the instanton results from considering the details of the WKB method. A classical particle can move in the potential - V(x) along a path from x = n to x = n + 1 with zero total energy. This motion, x̄ = x(t) is the instanton. The WKB expression for the instanton action is therefore [formula]. The factor K is given by

[formula]

In this expression, determinant of an operator means the product of all of the eigenvalues of the operator for wavefunctions that have finite norm and obey appropriate boundary conditions. The prime in the determinant in the denominator means that the zero eigenvalue of this operator must be omitted because otherwise the expression is ill-defined. Physically this corresponds to the location (in the Euclidean time parameter T) of the center of the instanton. The fact that this center can be anywhere results in the factor of T in the matrix element. The factor of [formula] comes about because one has to omit the zero mode from the determinant in the denominator of K. One should notice that K has the dimension of an inverse length, coming from the fact that there is one fewer eigenvalue in the determinant in the denominator relative to the numerator. K represents the difference between quantum fluctuations in the harmonic oscillator ground state and those associated with the instanton tunneling event.

The above expression describes what happens if the particle tunnels once from |n〉 to |n + 1〉, but it is clear that one must allow the possibility that the particle can tunnel an arbitrary number of times. This is just done by supposing that one adds the contribution of p instantons and q anti-instantons with p = q + 1 to indicate that one has only jumped by one step. To calculate a more general matrix element where one jumps from n to [formula] one adds the contributions from p instantons and q anti-instantons subject to [formula] This results in the expression

[formula]

where we have used [formula] The factors of p! and q! in the sum over the (anti)-instantons arise because the (anti)-instantons are indistinguishable. By comparing this expression with the definition of E(θ) we see that

[formula]

This shows that the lowest energy state, corresponding to θ = 0, is depressed relative to the simple estimate by an amount 2- S0  /  . It should be noted that the band is a continuum of width ΔE = 4- S0  /   whose wavefunctions correspond to varying θ from 0 to π. The fact that this is a continuous band is a consequence of allowing an infinite number of minima in the potential. Were one dealing with the case in which there were a finite number, N, of such minima, as we expect in string theory, then the locations of the boundary of the band would be unaltered for N  ≫  1 but instead of a continuum there would be N discrete energy levels in the band each separated by ~  ΔE   /   N.

The nature of the instanton calculation is such that it can be extended in a natural way to the case of field theory. The basic formalism is unaltered except that the energy of a state is now replaced by the energy density, and in the expression for K the determinant factors are replaced by the corresponding determinants of the wave operators governing the fluctuations in the quantum fields. The replacement of energy by energy density in field theory comes about because the basic degrees of freedom in field theory are oscillators at each point in space rather than single particles as in quantum mechanics.

The semi-classical effective action for gravitation coupled to a collection of scalar fields φi is

[formula]

where R is the Ricci scalar, and V(φ) is the potential for the scalars. Note that the only coupling constant in this expression is the [formula] in front of the gravitational piece of the action.

The situation we are discussing in cosmology is analagous to the quantum mechanical setup we just described, except for the physical interpretation of the instantons. We are assuming that in the absence of supersymmetry breaking, no vacuum energy is generated. Once supersymmetry is broken, there is a potential that governs which of the Calabi-Yau spaces we are in.  It has many minima.  Tunneling removes the degeneracies, pushing one level up and the other down repeatedly. Quantum fluctuations give rise naturally to a vacuum energy of m2susym2Pl which is the field theory analog of the zero point energy of the harmonic oscillator in our quantum mechanical example. This result will be modified by instanton effects because of the possibility of Hawking-Moss tunneling to any of the other possible vacua. Consider the case where all quantum corrections are turned off so that one is dealing with classical field theory. The possible vacua are then described by the product of four-dimensional Minkowski space with any Calabi-Yau space. No restriction is put on either the differential structure or the topology of the Calabi-Yau space. One knows that the differential structure is completely free, but it transpires that in string theory, one can even change the topology of the Calabi-Yau space without causing any singularities that would render such a change inadmissible, [\cite=pc]. When quantum corrections are turned on, some potential develops leading to N possible discrete vacua. Just as in our one-dimensional quantum mechanical example, eigenstates of the Hamiltonian will not be concentrated only in a single minimum since there are a huge number of minima all with the same vacuum energy at the bottom of their potential wells. It is perhaps rather premature to make a detailed model of what the actual potential looks like, but we can make some general observations. We expect that our results will applicable whatever the actual nature of the potential is for more or less the same reasons that the band structure of solids is more or less independent of the material.

In the overall picture we have a large number of minima, vacuum states.  There will be a complicated energy surface between these minima over which one could travel if one had sufficient energy available. Classically, if one does not have the energy available, one is trapped in a particular minimum and all of the other minima are irrelevant. Quantum mechanically however the effect of other discrete minima is extremely important. One can tunnel between various of these minima and the rate at which this happens has a profound influence on the physical consequences of this possible mixing of the vacua. To say something definite about the tunneling rates requires some understanding of this potential energy surface. At the bottom of each potential well, one expects that the potential is given by the usual low-energy supersymmetry breaking superpotential. Thus we expect that the curvature of the potential energy function at the bottom of each well is governed essentially by the supersymmetry-breaking scale, msusy. More precisely, the relevant scale should be proportional to msusy, so that it vanishes with msusy, but it could depend on other physics too. The situation we are describing is a little bit like looking at the surface of a lake. Prior to supersymmetry breaking, the surface of the lake is completely flat. Once supersymmetry breaking is turned on, the surface of the lake becomes irregular with all of the surface features governed by a single scale. Under these circumstances, the only scale relevant to instanton processes will be msusy. If we were thinking in the more traditional way where the observed universe corresponds to being confined to a single minimum, this could be a catastrophe since the potential barriers between different minima would be relatively small, and so the universe could quickly tunnel to some new minimum where the physics was quite different to the original minimum. Such a transition from one state to another is rather like that encountered in old  inflation, and could lead to regions of new vacuum expanding at the speed of light into a region of the old vacuum. Such an event has not happened even on cosmological timescales. However, in our picture, this is not important since the universe we are considering is a superposition of states described by all accessible vacuum states. No possibility of a sudden tunneling to a world unlike the one we now occupy exists.

It is possible that the potential also involves mPl in some essential way, though this seems rather unnatural, or perhaps the curvature is determined by the Hubble parameter H, since supersymmetry is broken by the energy density in the early universe [\cite=DRT]. Thus we will momentarily allow for these more general cases. Now we apply Hawking-Moss instanton methods to evaluate the spectrum and energy density of the ground state energy band. For definiteness, suppose that the actual potential consists of a d-dimensional hypercubic lattice of minima at zero vacuum energy at the points in field space [formula] The minima are separated by barriers of height roughly on the scale M. As we outlined above, it is not initially clear what scale M should have. The widths of these potential barriers are presumably controlled by the same basic scale. However, in the absence of supersymmetry breaking, the potential is flat, and supersymmetry breaking is what gives rise to the curvature of the potential. So, we expect that [formula] Equally unclear is the value of d. It is determined by which minima can communicate with which other minima via instantons, so all we can be sure of is that 1 < d < N.

For each direction, we can introduce a separate θ variable, so that our states are described by [formula] Let

[formula]

where we now evaluate this expression in a box of volume V. As T becomes large, then [formula] where ρ({θi}) is the energy density of the lowest energy states described by {θi}. Then by the usual type of instanton argument, we find

[formula]

Here we have used the appropriate field theory extrapolation of the instanton formula we used in the quantum mechanical model. The principal difference is that one is now calculating the energy density of the vacuum and the determinant factors in K are now replaced by the ratio of functional determinants describing the quantum fluctuations of the fields in the model. Just as in the quantum mechanical case, we evaluate M giving

[formula]

where S0 is the action of the instanton. Thus, a general expression for the vacuum energy density ρ for a state described by {θi} is

[formula]

Thus the lowest energy density in the band ρmin is found by choosing all the θi to vanish given by

[formula]

This expression makes it look as if ρmin could be negative. On general grounds, we know that ρmin  ≥  0, so ρmin < 0 would mean that our approximations have broken down. Equation (10) is our main technical result.

We now need to describe the precise nature of these instantons and what they do and do not connect. Each instanton describes the amplitude of tunneling between one particular minimum of the potential and one that is adjacent to it in field space, that is between, for example [formula] and [formula]. The situation we are describing here is quite different from the quantum mechanical example. The minima of the potential do not correspond to points in physical space, but rather describe the particular Calabi-Yau space on which ten-dimensional spacetime is compactified. In the traditional way of thinking about compactification, this corresponds to a particular vacuum state in which the wavefunction of the universe is concentrated. The precise nature of the Calabi-Yau space would then determine the physics of the low-energy world (particle spectrum, coupling constants, masses etc.,) if the wavefunction could be so localized. But, the wavefunction must spread out over all of these vacua or at least some superselection sector. We expect that the wavefunction of the universe will therefore be some superposition of many of these Calabi-Yau vacua, and then presumably low-energy physics is determined statistically from the properties of these many vacua. A potential question then is why must one consider such a superposition, analogous to the theta vacua of QCD? If there were a conserved current, then states would be labeled by the corresponding charge. However, suppose that one imagined starting off the universe with the wavefunction concentrated in one particular minimum, and the Hamiltonian were such that the wavefunction could leak into another distinct minimum. Then having the wavefunction concentrated in one specified minimum could not possibly be an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian. To find eigenstates of the Hamiltonian one must include the possibility that one has a superposition of various states making up a wavefunction with support in potentially a considerable number of distinct minima.

Thus the transitions are not realized in spacetime as tunneling from one metastable state to another, but rather as a mechanism for calculating the energy spectrum of the theory taking into account these effects which can never be calculated in perturbation theory. This is to be contrasted with the usual uses of instantons in which they provide a mechanism by which the universe can start in some particular vacuum state and evolve, by a quantum mechanical tunneling process, to a new vacuum. Examples of this process include old inflation, [\cite=Guth] and studies of the cosmological constant problem in most of the papers we have been able to find. In particular, the most common procedure whereby a bubble of true vacuum nucleates in a sea of false vacuum would not be expected to give the correct answer for the problem we are considering.

There are two types of instanton that have been used to evaluate such amplitudes. The first (historically) is the Coleman-De Luccia [\cite=CDeL] instanton which is not appropriate for us. In the absence of gravitation, their instanton has a size that is inversely proportional to the difference in the classical energy densities between the two adjacent minima. Since the minima are degenerate for purposes of calculating the spectrum, the difference is zero and so the size must be very large. So we believe that this instanton would have a physical dimension that is potentially greater than the size of the universe. The universe we are describing is de Sitter, since the effective cosmological constant is, and will remain, positive according to our results. It has a spatial extent that is finite. So their instanton is not relevant. Although this picture is modified by the inclusion of gravitation, the modifications are slight and do not affect the above conclusion [\cite=CDeL], [\cite=HM].

The second type is the so-called Hawking-Moss [\cite=HM] instanton. Here, the values of the fields are constant in space and such that one sits at the top of the potential barrier between adjacent vacua. Thus one expects the energy density there to be M4. If one were in infinite flat space, the resultant action S0 for this instanton would be also be infinite, and the corresponding amplitude would vanish. But, since we are in de Sitter space, with finite spatial volume, the contribution is finite, and the amplitudes are not suppressed. In fact, we can estimate the action for this instanton. The potential term in the action we denote by V(φ) where φ are the relevant collection of fields, such as moduli fields or any fields that parameterize the fluctuations. The Euclidean action for constant φ is

[formula]

where the integral is taken over four-dimensional Euclidean de Sitter space. Since V(φ)  ~  M4 and the volume of Euclidean de Sitter space is H- 4, the action S0  ~  4H- 4, which is [formula] at the supersymmetry breaking scale or earlier. These instantons occur, and are relevant, whenever there is a finite potential barrier between any minima in a spacetime of finite volume.. These instantons are the ones that are relevant to the calculation of the spectrum of energies of the superposition of degenerate string theory vacua we are discussing.

Next, we need to determine K. KVT can be evaluated by standard Feynman diagram type calculations. To one loop, it is given by the ratio of the determinants of those operators governing the fluctuations of the quantum fields in our problem evaluated in the presence of the instanton field to those evaluated without. There is a large literature on such objects, see for example [\cite=GP], [\cite=CD], [\cite=FT]. The determinants in the absence of the instanton depend only on H and the curvature at the bottom of the potential well, whereas in the presence of the instanton they depend on H and the curvature at the top of the barrier. Thus we expect that roughly K  ~  H4 in the early universe.

Since the levels are generated by splitting of degenerate levels mixed by instanton effects, the lowest level can never become negative.  It must always lie above the positive (or zero) minimum of the potential. If each vacuum state could communicate with only a single nearest neighbor, then d  ~  1.  If all vacua can rapidly tunnel to the others, then d  ~  N. We expect [formula] where N is an effective number of string vacua that are connected. The separation between the various states in this band is ~  Kd   /   Ne- S0  /  .

Suppose that Kde- S0  /   is of order ρo. Then the bottom of the band will reach down to a vacuum energy of nearly zero. Since the separation of the energy densities is roughly (Kd / N)e- S0  /    ~  ρo / N, we can expect that ρde  ~  ρo / N. For this to work as observed, since ρo  ~  m2susym2Pl, S0  /    ~  1 and [formula], we find [formula] and [formula]. For M  ~  msusy, as discussed above, we find d  ~  1032. Since d  ≪  N, we expect our approximation to be reliable. (If H is relevant rather than msusy then d might be somewhat smaller.) Rather amazingly, these figures do not appear to contradict any known facts or estimates about string theory compactification. String theorists should regard this as an experimental determination of the value of N. Cosmologists should perhaps regard this as a prediction of the value of Λde.

In this picture, the universe is not in a state described by any one minimum of the effective potential. This is in accordance with what one expects from generic quantum mechanical systems with large numbers of degenerate minima. Whilst this is not alarming for the cases of something like an electron in a crystal, it is a bit strange within the context of cosmology. The wavefunction of the universe would seem to be described by the statistical properties of many minima. However d  ≪  N so it seems as if the actual number of states that are involved is relatively small, only 1032 or so. One would expect that these states would all have features in common with the observed universe, such as there being three families, a low-energy gauge group of [formula] massless quarks and leptons, etc. and would have the same values of all conserved quantities. Such quantities would be a sort of superselection set.

Finally, as discussed at the beginning of the paper, it is necessary to deal with not only the energy from the quantum fluctuations but also the repeated release of energy density as the universe cools.  What we expect qualitatively is that the relaxation time for the universe to cascade to the lowest levels is small, because the levels are closely spaced and this old-fashioned tunneling is rapid.  Initially the energy from quantum fluctuations gives N levels with energy density ~  m2susym2Pl.  Then the mixing splits the levels and the universe falls down to the low-lying levels with energy density ~  m2susym2Pl / N.  Inflation and reheating are occurring and the universe cools.  At various phase transitions additional energy density is dumped in, rearranging the levels.  Quickly the tunneling splits them, again leaving the universe in a low level. For each case N,d will be different: [formula] etc.

Perhaps protein folding is a useful analogy. Think of the universe as a protein. Initially the protein is in a high energy level, and then it quickly falls mainly by tunneling to a minimum of the energy.  The physics of protein folding has for some time been described in terms of an energy landscape, a terminology recently introduced into  particle physics in [\cite=suss]. For a review of the situation in protein folding see [\cite=j].

For this picture to be valid it is necessary first that the cascade take place sufficiently rapidly. This is much easier to achieve if the [formula] levels have widths at least of the order of their splitting. Although at present we are unable to estimate the width of these levels, because there are so many levels this seems entirely plausible. There must also be a mechanism for dissipating the released energy.  Since vacuum energy couples to gravity, surely graviton emission will be an important way to carry the energy away. That is because only the gravitational field couples to the vacuum energy density. So we expect that graviton emission will cause θi to decay. Because of gauge invariance, it turns out that graviton pair production is the most important process, so that gravitons are produced with opposite momenta and carry away energy in the usual way, [\cite=Ford]. Perhaps it is possible for other processes also to contribute, for example the production of branes as has been considered in [\cite=k], [\cite=feng]

To estimate such effects, we suppose that the θi can be viewed as fields with spatial and time dependence. If that was all there was to it, then the equations of motion for θi would imply that θi were constant. That is because vacuum energy couples to the gravitational field through a term in the four-dimensional tree level action of the form

[formula]

Quantum gravity effects will however generate additional terms in the one-loop effective Lagrangian, [formula] and [formula]. The first is the standard kinetic energy expression for the fields θi, and the second is just the usual mass term. The resultant semi-classical equations of motion then can be derived from the effective Lagrangian for each θi, which leads to the decay of θi's to zero on a Planck timescale, rapidly enough to guarantee that the θi are minimized along with the energy density.

If correct, our approach has a  number of phenomenological implications.  Since the level splitting mechanism can push the lowest levels down but not below the absolute minimum of the potential, a small non-zero cosmological constant is a generic result.  Since the energy density is a cosmological constant, we predict a time-independent equation of state, w =  - 1.

The why now problem -- why is the size of Ωde about the same as Ωdm so the dark energy is dominating now rather than much earlier, in which case it could have prevented formation of gravitationally bound systems -- is in principle solved by our approach, if the number of connected string vacua and the fluctuation energy density could be calculated. Of course, in practice that is very difficult. If the number of connected string degenerate minima is very large, then the number of possible ground states with energies of order 10- 3 eV or less is large. The actual ground state of a universe can be any of the low lying ones, many of which would allow solar system and galaxy formation. This requires [formula] which is consistent with our estimates. But to fully explain why now it is necessary actually to calculate ρ0 and N rather accurately.

While our approach is not an anthropic one, a residual anthropic element could enter until it could be proved that the number of connected string vacua was large enough to guarantee that there were many very low lying levels, and that the relaxation mechanism was very efficient in tunneling to very low lying levels. All universes that can form structure will -- there is no reason why we should live in a highly probably one.

A persistent problem for supergravity and string-based model building is what to do about the cosmological constant.  Our approach suggests that the solution to the cosmological constant problem will not impact significantly other aspects of models, such as soft breaking Lagrangian parameters or Yukawa couplings in the superpotential or CP violation properties. Our approach may also offer the possibility of changes in the low-energy effective couplings at phase transitions. For example near the electroweak or QCD transitions changes could occur since then additional vacuum energy poured into the universe from the phase transitions could trigger vacuum readjustments that could allow for changes in scalar vacuum expectation values at these eras.

An apparently unpleasant consequence of our approach is that our world is not in the minimum of the potential of a single compactification but rather a superposition of a large number of different ones.  Of course the relevant number that mix must all have the same value of the number of families and any similar properties, so the total number of string vacua can be considerably larger than the connected ones. Probably all of the properties of the world that are shared by all of the connected states, such as the number of families, the standard model gauge group, softly broken N = 1 supersymmetry, etc., can be derived even though the ground state is a superposition. More generally, it will not only be hard to identify the correct string vacuum from first principles, it is probably both not possible and not relevant.  In the end that may be a virtue -- just as inflation can provide powerful explanatory power (once the inflaton is identified), so too perhaps having the universe in a highly mixed state will allow progress once it is better understood.

One might start to wonder when this mechanism for producing a cosmological constant becomes the dominant one. At very early times after compactification, there must surely be a period of inflation at or around the GUT scale. This means that whatever corrections to the cosmological constant we generate must be small compared to this rather larger scale. This puts a somewhat different limit on the value of N. By analogy with our previous estimates, we find that [formula]. At later stages, periods of inflation could take place, but in the end we will always relax down to close to the bottom of the band of allowed energies. Thus, for example it could be that there is inflation at the electroweak transition. Equally, it might happen that the precise state we end up in before and after this period of inflation could be different, leading to (hopefully not drastic) differences in low-energy physics before and after the transition. Similar comments also of course apply to the QCD phase transition. In contrast, at the supersymmetry breaking transition, we first find our mechanism to give interesting results leading to a much lower cosmological constant than naively envisaged.

What we have presented is a mechanism that seems to be able to deal with the cosmological constant problem(s). To establish that it indeed does, it will be necessary to have a much better understanding of the number of connected string vacua, the relaxation issues and the interactions connecting different vacua and perhaps other issues. We are presently examining these questions further, [\cite=KPZZ]. If this approach is indeed correct, then the dark energy should just be thought of as an energy density purely due to ubiquitous quantum fluctuations.

We would like to thank Michigan Center for Theoretical Physics for its generous hospitality to MJP and ANZ, and the US Department of Energy for partial financial support, S. Krimm for providing helpful references about protein folding, and D. Berman, M. Douglas, G. Gibbons, F. Larsen, J.T. Liu, R. McNees, J. Wells and R-J. Zhang for helpful conversations.