=1

The K2 Mission: Characterization and Early Results

Introduction

The NASA Kepler mission was launched in 2009 and collected wide-field photometric observations of a single field of view located in the constellations of Cygnus and Lyra (Borucki, et al., 2010). The data obtained by Kepler has revolutionized the study of exoplanets and astrophysics by providing high-precision, high-cadence, continuous light curves of tens of thousands of stars. The loss of two reaction wheels on the Kepler spacecraft has ended the primary mission data collection and the project is currently analyzing the final year of observations. The Kepler project has thus proposed the K2 mission to NASA via the 2014 Senior Review process. K2 is the name chosen for this new mission concept to allow a distinction between it and the nominal Kepler mission. K2 can be thought of as being a 2-wheel Kepler, the second Kepler mission, or as an analogy to the enigmatic and challenging mountain of the same name. A decision on funding K2 will be reached in late spring 2014 and if positive, K2 will begin official operations near 1 June 2014, making observations for approximately the next 2 years along the lines discussed in this paper.

The Kepler spacecraft, with its 0.95-m Schmidt telescope and 110 sq. degree field of view imager (4 arc-second pixels), is in a heliocentric orbit currently about 0.5 AU from the Earth. Like Kepler, the K2 mission is founded on the proven value of long-baseline, high-cadence, high-precision photometry and exploit a large field of view to simultaneously monitor many targets.

The K2 mission plan is to point near the ecliptic, sequentially observing fields as it orbits the Sun. This observing strategy regularly brings new, well-characterized target regions into view, enabling observations of scientifically important objects across a wide range of galactic latitudes in both the northern and southern skies. K2 will perform a series of long, ecliptic-pointed campaigns that use the proven Kepler infrastructure to conduct new research into planet formation processes, young stars, stellar activity, stellar structure and evolution, and extragalactic science. Herein, we present the details of our new method of spacecraft operation and some early results that characterize the scientific abilities of K2.

The K2 Mission

The K2 mission is driven by the spacecraft's ability to maintain pointing in all three axes with only two reaction wheels (Putnam & Wiemer, 2014). Figure 1 shows a schematic of the spacecraft and the X-, Y-, and Z-axes. Solar pressure represents the only disturbing force, which is controlled by wheels about the Y- and Z-axes and by thrusters about the X-axis. Sustained, stable pointing requires that the X-axis disturbing force (roll axis) be minimized for extended periods. This is accomplished by pointing in the orbital plane, where the apparent motion of the Sun (caused by the spacecraft's orbital motion while inertially pointed) follows the spacecraft line of symmetry in the X-Y plane over the course of a campaign, providing a balanced pressure and minimizing the X-axis disturbance.

By carefully selecting the initial roll angle and correcting for drift every 12 hours, the spacecraft can remain stable in roll during the observation period. Meanwhile, the reaction wheels control pointing about the Y- and Z-axes as in the Kepler mission, absorbing the torque generated by the solar radiation pressure. The accumulated momentum is dumped through thruster firings every two days. This operating mode provides a fuel budget that allows for a 2-3 year mission duration. Starting in October 2013, the operations team has demonstrated and refined the techniques needed to fly the spacecraft using this approach, perform an on-orbit demonstration of performance, and deliver early commissioning science ().

K2 has begun to observe a series of independent target fields (campaigns) in the orbital plane (essentially the ecliptic plane). The duration of each observing campaign is limited by solar illumination constraints on the spacecraft, bounded by power constraints on one end and aperture illumination on the other. Science observations are limited to about 75 days per field, as illustrated in Figure 2.

A generic K2 observing campaign timeline is shown in Figure 3. Each K2 campaign will start when the target field comes into view. A checkout period will be used to upload target tables and configure the spacecraft attitude control system for the upcoming campaign. The spacecraft will then be turned to the new science attitude to collect pointing alignment data, which are downlinked to the ground stations and to the project in near real-time. Analysis of these data will then allow adjustments to the spacecraft configuration as needed and start the science observations for the campaign. To maximize the unbroken observation period and reduce operational cost/complexity, all science data will be stored onboard until the end of the campaign. The spacecraft will then autonomously turn to point the high-gain antenna back toward the Earth and the science data downlinked. Afterwards, the next campaign checkout period will began. During science observations, in-situ health and safety checks will be performed periodically and fault protection will monitor spacecraft performance, placing the spacecraft into safe-mode in the event of a significant anomaly.

K2 retains the Kepler point-and-stare observing approach, minimizes operational changes, and utilizes the data processing infrastructure with modifications limited to those required to accommodate the larger pointing drift and pointing control artifacts. The quantity of the data delivered from each campaign will be far less than any Kepler quarter, as K2 will be observing only ~  10,000 targets, not the 150,000 observed in the nominal mission. Spacecraft communications will only slightly degrade over the anticipated K2 lifetime (2-3 years) and will have no effect on the science data quality discussed here. All spacecraft operations are managed through parameter table updates, and no flight software changes are required. Aside from the failed reaction wheels and the loss of two CCD modules (No. 3 in Jan. 2010 and No. 7 in Jan. 2013), the spacecraft has shown little performance degradation and the remaining reaction wheels show no signs of wear. Each K2 imaging science campaign will cover ~  105 square degrees and be self-contained.

K2 Key Science Goals

The K2 mission was conceived to repurpose the Kepler spacecraft within the limitations imposed by two-wheel operations, and was influenced by the large community response to a summer 2013 call for white papers. K2 is a multi-field, ecliptic-pointed mission that will allow observations of thousands of targets covering the science areas of transiting exoplanets, clusters of young and pre-main sequence stars, asteroseismology, AGN variability, and supernovae.

In each year of operation, K2 will observe approximately 40,000 targets (~  10,000 per field of view) spread over four fields of view. K2 will collect data at 30-minute and 1-minute cadences and will produce 80-ppm photometry for 12th magnitude stars on 6-hour time scales (). K2 will observe in both the northern and southern sky, in and out of the plane of the Galaxy and, over two years, cover ten times more sky area than the original Kepler mission.

The K2 mission will provide many opportunities for new discoveries through its observation of targets and Galactic regions not accessible to Kepler (e. g. Beichman et al., 2013). K2 is a community-driven observatory with targets chosen from peer-reviewed proposals; even the K2 fields will be chosen in coordination with the community (). As such, we can not know ahead of time the exact number or type of targets K2 will observe. No predetermined set or type of targets is part of the mission concept. The peer-review process will determine the actual target mix for each K2 field of view and thus what science will be possible from the observations made in each campaign. Ecliptic fields which lie out of the Galactic plane are likely to be dominated by extragalactic targets while those in dense star forming regions will probably receive proposals aimed mainly at young stars and clusters. Additional science results are also expected through observations of unique sources such as solar system objects, black-hole and x-ray binaries, young massive stars, and numerous variable and pulsating stars. K2 will use its unique assets to make observations capable of answering important questions in a number of science areas that are briefly highlighted below.

K2 Observations of Transiting Exoplanets

Kepler discovered that planets are common with small ones being plentiful (Howard et al., 2012). To move from discovery to characterization, host stars and their planets are needed which enable followup yielding detailed properties. The K2 photometric precision will be lower and the time per field shorter than the Kepler mission, however, K2 has the potential to become a powerful exoplanet finder, easily exceeding the capabilities of ground-based surveys by large margins in sensitivity, field-of-view, and continuous time coverage. Figure 4, based on early science results (), illustrates the ability of K2 to detect planets as functions of stellar type and exoplanet radius.

Observations of Exoplanets Orbiting Low-Mass Stars

M dwarfs offer a unique opportunity to progress from planetary discovery to characterization. The proximity of these host stars and the large photometric transit depths allow a wide variety of additional observations aimed at characterizing the atmospheres and properties of such planets. For example, the exoplanet GJ1214b (Charbonneau et al., 2009), while not in the Habitable Zone or rocky, was discovered orbiting a star relatively close to the Sun and lead to many interesting and useful follow-up studies.

The highlighted box in Figure 4 shows the K2 discovery space for small rocky planets (<  1.6) orbiting M dwarfs. Note that the rapid decrease in stellar radius beyond spectral type M1V (<   3600K) allows K2 to detect small planets even for the generally faint population of M stars.

The results from the Kepler mission point toward a high occurrence rate for small planets closely orbiting M dwarfs (e.g., Dressing & Charbonneau, 2013; Gaidos, 2013; Kopparapu, 2013). Due to their low absolute luminosity, M dwarfs are a local population and their distribution remains approximately uniform across all K2 fields-of-view (Ridgway, et al., 2014). K2 can observe approximately 4000 M dwarfs brighter than 16th magnitude per field. From the Kepler estimated M dwarf small-planet frequency, it is expected that K2 will discover approximately 100 Earths and Super-earths (0.8≤  RPlanet  ≤  2.0) per year(~  4.5 fields), with a few in the Habitable Zone (defined here as the empirical Habitable Zone; Dressing and Charbonneau, 2013). The larger transit depths of M dwarf planets open the door to a variety of ground- and space-based follow-up observations. The detection of such transits would permit detailed follow-up studies as were done for GJ1214b, providing pre-launch targets for JWST and the next generation of large-aperture ground-based telescopes.

Observations of Exoplanets Orbiting Bright Stars

The main objective of the Kepler mission was to measure the occurrence rate of planets around Sun-like stars, particularly for Earth-size planets. Kepler target stars were generally faint (V = 13 to 15) in order to build a large enough sample that could be searched continuously for four years. The Kepler results, that exoplanets are common, is crucial for the design of future instrumentation and missions that will make the next leap in exoplanetary science - exoplanet characterization. To accomplish this, the nearest and brightest stars, harboring the most readily studied planets and planetary systems need to be discovered.

Bright stars (V<  12) offer far more information than simply telling us about the mere existence of a planet. A significant open question in exoplanetary science concerns the interior structure and composition of planets smaller than 2, irrespective of orbital location. Most planets below 1.4 seem to be rocky (Marcy et al. 2014), while planets larger than 2  appear to be volatile rich mini-Neptunes. However, the densities are known for only a handful of planets between these bounds.

Transits detected on bright stars by K2 will enable precise Doppler spectroscopy, to provide planetary masses and densities, and spectroscopic characterization of planetary atmospheric properties. Bright stars are also amenable to high-resolution spectroscopy, high-resolution imaging, asteroseismology, interferometry, proper motion, and parallax measurements, all useful to determine the host star properties

The number of bright dwarfs (V<  12) that K2 can observe in each campaign fluctuates throughout the year from around 3000 to over 7000. Figure 5 shows the detectable planet sizes that can be found in short-period orbits during a typical campaign. It should be noted that about 40% of the planet candidates found by Kepler have periods less than eight days and about half of these have sizes less than 2  (Ciardi et al., 2013). Assuming 50% of the targets are V<  12 stars, K2 will observe approximately 20,000 bright stars in a given year and it should find about 50 potentially rocky planet candidates based on Kepler statistics. The ecliptic is already home to a number of bright exoplanet host stars: 15 are bright (V=5-8) with short-period RV planets and 23 are transiting systems.

K2 Observations of Open Clusters

MOST, CoRoT and Kepler have all made contributions to open-cluster science, but for limited samples and for distant, faint and crowded clusters. K2 campaigns () are planned to survey a rich area of the sky, containing the brightest and best characterized clusters (see Table 1). Much is already known about these clusters and associations, including cluster membership and stellar properties.

In these clusters, K2 can survey a few thousand bright pre- and early main sequence stars down to 0.15. Assuming a photometric precision of 80 ppm on transit timescales for a 12th magnitude star, K2 can comfortably detect planets down to 2.5, the size of Super-Earths, in all the clusters listed in Table 1. The incidence of short-period planets around field stars (Fressin et al., 2013; Petigura et al., 2013) suggests that a few transiting hot Jupiters and Neptunes will be found per campaign, as well as several tens of Super-Earths and smaller planets assuming ~  1500 cluster members are observed (see .1). To date, only a handful of planets have been detected in open clusters (Quinn et al., 2012; Meibom et al., 2013; Brucalassi et al., 2014). These discoveries indicate that the incidence of large planets in clusters is similar to that around field stars. The K2 mission has the ability to determine if small planets are as common in open clusters as in the field. Planetary systems discovered in the Hyades will be particularly valuable for follow-up studies with JWST, being bright and only 46 pc from the Sun.

The past decade has seen an increase in the number of rotation-period measurements available for pre-main sequence and early main sequence stars, but theoretical models still struggle to reproduce all the available data (e.g., Gallet and Bouvier, 2013). Typical rotation periods for young cluster stars range from 1 to 20 days (Irwin & Bouvier, 2009), and have large and distinct modulation amplitudes, easily detectable and distinguished from transit events. K2 observations of many cluster members can provide an essentially complete rotation census in each targeted cluster.

Detached, double-lined eclipsing binaries provide model independent determination of the masses, radii, effective temperatures, and luminosities of both stars from the light and radial velocity curves of the system. CoRoT observations of the open cluster NGC2264 (Gillen et al., 2013) and Kepler observations of NGC 6811 (Janes et al., 2013) can be used to estimate that K2 will discover ~  10 new eclipsing binaries per cluster for which the masses and radii of both components can be determined to about 1%. The continuous sampling achievable by K2 also enhances the sensitivity to moderate period (i.e., 8-20 days) eclipsing binaries, enabling their (spin) evolution to be studied as a function of the mutual interaction between the two stars.

The use of asteroseismology can significantly advance our understanding of stellar evolution, stellar-interior physics, and stellar populations (Chaplin & Miglio 2013). Nowhere will this be more powerful then when used to combine high-precision photometric observations with strong prior information on age, distance, and metallicity in clusters that span a wide range in mass, chemical composition, and evolutionary state. K2 observations of bright stars within clusters, e. g., O-B stars (Aerts et al., 2003,2013; Degroote et al., 2010) or A and F pulsators (Michaud & Richer, 2013) can yield results on radiative levitation and element depletion processes, and the onset of near-surface convection, and allow comparisons of distance scales for various cluster stars using the standard pulsating variables such as RR Lyrae stars or Cepheids.

Studies of Galactic star populations with K2, both in clusters and in the field, could measure radii, masses, distances, and ages of thousands of giants providing a unique asteroseismic survey spanning a wide range of vertical and radial structure in our Galaxy. These data would allow Galactic mass and age gradients to be studied and characterized for a wide range of populations, out to similar distances to those probed by red-giants in the Kepler field. Detections in the Kepler and CoRoT fields are already being utilized (e.g., see Miglio et al., 2013; Stello et al., 2013), but their fixed pointings carry obvious limitations that will be lifted for K2 (Figure 6). Combined with astrometric data from Gaia, K2 observations of field red giants would provide a valuable community dataset (Chaplin & Miglio, 2013).

Observations of Star-Forming Regions

Understanding how giant planets form and accumulate their gaseous envelopes is still an observational frontier. K2 campaigns will study star-forming regions providing the opportunity to test planet-formation theories by probing planetary properties during formation or immediately thereafter. Standard core accretion (e.g., Lissauer et al., 2009) predicts that proto-giant planet sizes are large (50-100 ) during the slow-gas accretion phase. After accretion has ended, the planet contracts to a more modest size (~  1.1 to 1.6) for a 1  planet. The actual value of the planetary radius at this young age is extremely sensitive to how efficiently the planet radiates away accretion energy. Measuring small planet sizes with K2 will show that the radiation process is extremely efficient and this energy is easily lost: planets start off their life with a "cold start". Detecting much larger planets with K2 might indicate an earlier phase of evolution or that the accretion process is not efficient in radiating energy away.

The migration of hot Jupiters early in a star's life (less than 1 Gyr) is believed to result from one of two mechanisms: migration within the protoplanetary disk ("disk migration"; e.g., Raymond et al., 2006) or some mechanism that dynamically produces highly eccentric orbits, evolved via tides ("dynamical migration"; e.g., Albrecht et al., 2012). These two scenarios deliver the hot Jupiters at different times during the star's evolution, promptly, or delayed to greater than 0.5 Gyr by tidal evolution. Therefore, any K2 measured orbital periods of Jupiter-mass planets will be a sensitive test of hot vs. cold-start models and migration scenarios (see Marley et al. 2007, Spiegel and Burrows, 2012). Characterizing planetary systems at the few Myr age of T Tauri stars will explore the dynamical evolution of planetary systems by comparison with the results of more mature planetary systems. Measured abundances of hot Jupiters around young stars can be compared with measurements obtained by Kepler for older field stars.

The variability of the young stars is likely to be higher than field stars (Van Eyken et al., 2012), which will provide interesting science in itself, but may impact transit detection and RV follow-up. However, hydrodynamics studies of forming giant planets (e.g., Klahr & Kley, 2006; Gressel et al., 2013) suggest that these objects may be more readily detectable than previously believed. For example, in their 3-D radiation hydrodynamics study, Klahr (2008) found that the nascent planet is surrounded by a warm pressure-supported bubble with a large pressure scale height (H/R~  0.5) rather than a thin Keplerian circumplanetary accretion disk (H/R ≤   0.1). If such gas/dust bubbles are indeed signposts of giant planet formation, their large scale height would likely make them detectable through a transit signature as they occult the central star. K2 observations of a very large sample of well-characterized young stars during their early formation processes would yield valuable information as well as targets for follow-up with ALMA.

K2 Observations of Variable Extragalactic Sources

Kepler observations of extragalactic sources have allowed the initial exploration of AGN variability on a variety of time scales (hours to months) (Mushotzky et al., 2011). Edelson et al., (2013) and Olling et al., (2013) have found new AGN exhibiting low levels of activity, and have discovered at least four supernovae. K2 can provide observations of thousands of galaxies, many well studied (e.g., COSMOS field), through its observations at high Galactic latitude, areas rich in extragalactic sources.

AGN Variability

Theoretical models (Arevalo et al., 2009; Breedt et al., 2010) suggest that the power spectral densities (PSDs) of accretions disks have spectral indices of -1.4 to -2.0. However, Kepler observations provide a few well-determined PSDs yielding slopes of -3.0 (Mushotzky et al., 2011). The steep measured slopes are inconsistent with model predictions, but are based on a small sample. In addition, BL Lac microvariability (0.5-1%) measurements, such as for W2R1926+42 observed with Kepler, provide evidence for periods of strong flaring and periods of relative quiescence. This type of behavior cannot be fit with the existing simple models for Seyfert galaxies. A larger sample of sources is needed, including various AGN types with varying properties such as luminosity and black-hole mass.

Edelson and Malkan (2012) list 4316 AGN in the entire sky brighter than J=16 (R~  17) suggesting nearly a dozen bright AGN will reside in each K2 field. It is likely that K2 will observe over a hundred microvariable extragalactic sources during its mission (Edelson et al., 2013), allowing a broad range of variable AGN to be observed in statistically significant numbers that will provide robust testing of the current models.

Progenitors of Type Ia Supernovae

Over 20,000 known galaxies brighter than 19th magnitude will be visible per year in K2 fields. K2 observations could allow detection of supernovae for the observed galaxies. Taking the typical observed supernova rate (0.7 supernova/century/ galaxy; Olling et al., 2013), K2 will observe many galaxies for a variety of scientific reasons, some of them, a few tens per year, will contain supernova whose early light curves will be serendipitously collected.

Olling et al. (2013) present a Type Ia supernova light curve obtained with Kepler. The continuous light curve coverage starting prior to onset yields unique observations of the early event. This early rise-time information can, for all types of supernovae, tightly constrain the progenitor of the explosion and detail the subsequent shock physics (Woosley et al., 2007; Kasen, 2010; Haydon et al., 2010). Theoretical models (Nakar & Sari, 2010; Kasen, 2010) show that a single degenerate star will cause smooth shock emission in the first few hours to days after the explosion, while double degenerates are expected to brighten monotonically. There are no existing or planned facilities that can provide initial and early rise-time information for supernovae light curves with the precision and time coverage available with K2.

K2 Micro-Lensing Observations

For the majority of the planets currently detected by microlensing, a parallax determination is needed to determine their masses and distances (Gould, 1999; Dong, 2009). K2 might provide this missing ingredient by measuring "microlens parallaxes" (Gould & Horne, 2013). Planets detected in this manner are particularly interesting because they inhabit a cold region that is inaccessible to other detection methods (Gould & Loeb, 1992).

The K2 solar orbit and wide field-of-view make it well suited to measure microlens parallaxes. K2 will see a radically different event from the Earth-based event because it is displaced by approximately 0.5 AU. When combined with ground-based observations, the measured parallax yields the host star and planet masses. K2 could observe as many as 12 microlensed planets in a single campaign (Gould & Horne, 2013), enabling the first robust measurement of the mass function of cold, low-mass planets across different stellar populations. One of the most spectacular results from microlensing is the detection of "free-floating" planets. Here too, the microlensing parallax will measure the mass of these objects and confirm their planetary nature.

K2 microlensing results would also provide important input to future microlensing surveys, in particular WFIRST, by estimating the expected yield determining the resources needed for WFIRST follow-up. Field 9 (, Figure 7), is a forward looking field, and is ideal for a microlensing study as it is near the Galactic center. Forward looking fields, that is pointing in the positive velocity vector of the spacecraft, offer the ability of simultaneous Earth-based observations during the K2 observations. However, the Earth and moon enter into the K2 field of view during the 75-day campaign. Our initial planning for Field 9 is likely to consist of shorter visits to dense star fields and to use full-frame readouts of the entire array instead of individual target pixels. This unique K2 campaign will be dedicated to a microlensing investigation and will operate differently than the other campaigns. In order to obtain the highest scientific return from this microlens study, the exact method of field 9 observations will be planned in coordination with the microlensing community.

K2 Community Involvement: Field and Target Selection & Science Archives

Based upon the the spacecraft abilities, the two-wheel white paper call and additional community feedback, a series of ecliptic K2 fields of view have been proposed (Figure 7). These fields are rich in the types of targets requested by the community. Table 2 lists the planned K2 campaigns, the RA and DEC of the center of the field of view, and the date of mid-campaign. The locations of Fields 1 and 2 are now fixed with Fields 3-9 still accepting community input. Each K2 field position needs to be finalized approximately six months prior to its start. The location of each campaign field attempts to optimize the science yield while balancing the spacecraft abilities as well as providing the requisite number of guide stars for the telescope. Maximizing the science, for example, might move a field start or end date a few days to include more stars from a highly proposed cluster. These types of trades in the field position are balanced with the mission concept of providing long-term observations (75 days) at each field and moving from field to field with as few as possible non-science collection days in between. Details of the location of each field and the method for user input can be found at the Kepler science Center13.

K2 will observe 10,000-20,000 targets per campaign collected on a 30-min cadence and an additional 100 targets per campaign collected on a 1-min cadence. Target numbers are limited by on-board storage and compression, downlink capability, and campaign length. The precise number of targets observed will vary by campaign and will be an optimized trade based upon targets and spacecraft pointing performance. The scientific community will propose all targets for each campaign. The K2 mission will provide a catalog of potential sources within each campaign field based on photometric and astrometric surveys such as Hipparcos, Tycho-2, UCAC-4, 2MASS and SDSS. The catalog will contain celestial coordinates, proper motions, parallaxes, broadband magnitudes, inferred K2 bandpass magnitudes, as well as estimates of stellar properties (e.g., effective temperature, surface gravity, and metallicity). Each catalog will be archived at the MAST prior to calls to the community for target proposals. The K2 targets discussed herein and the potential results from our listed key science areas are subject to successful proposals from the community. There will be no restrictions on what type of science may be proposed and no exclusive use period for any K2 data.

K2 has begun making preliminary science observations starting on 8 March 2014 (Campaign 0), that was moved slightly to include the open cluster M35. Of the >  100,000 targets proposed for Campaign 0, approximately one-third (with many duplicates) proposed targets in M35 with the remaining majority being bright stars, galaxies, and M stars. All K2 campaigns will have peer-reviewed target selection; Campaign 0 and 1 targets have already been solicited and submitted with campaign 1 targets under review at present via a project selected external review panel. Future campaign targets would be solicited through a NASA announcement of opportunity (AO) similar to other NASA guest observer (GO) programs with the proposals reviewed by a NASA appointed external panel. The details of this review process will be formulated and a guest observer (GO) program is anticipated to begin in summer 2014 if the K2 mission is approved.

The K2 mission will deliver all time-series data to a legacy archive hosted at the Mikulski Archive for Space Telescope (MAST; http://archive.stsci. edu/kepler). The K2 archive will reuse the architecture of the Kepler archive, with the advantage that it will look and feel much like the Kepler archive. Data products will be produced and archived three months after the end of each campaign, allowing the community to rapidly pursue ground-based follow-up and compete for NASA and other funding resources as early as possible. For Campaigns 0-2, calibrated pixels (bias corrected, flat fielded, smear corrected, and with ADU's converted into electrons) will be delivered on this nominal schedule, while the higher-level products will be delivered at a later date in 2014. In support of community-led exoplanet candidate detection, vetting, validation, verification and follow-up, the Exoplanet Archive (http://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu) will host the list of potential exoplanet transit events and associated diagnostic data, as well as provide tools and additional data resources for their exploitation. K2 community support will be provided by the Kepler Science Center at the NASA Ames Research Center.

K2 Early Science Results

Based upon a series of spacecraft tests between October 2013 and February 2014, spacecraft operations were refined to maximize two-wheel performance from K2 and deliver science verification results. These tests have demonstrated all of the functionality required for the K2 mission. Science validation data were collected to characterize K2 mission performance, and are presented here to provide a demonstration of K2's ability to carry out its key science goals.

The K2 photometric precision primarily depends on motion of the spacecraft boresight during timescales shorter than an exposure and timescales longer than a single exposure due to motion caused by solar-induced drift. Tests to date have demonstrated spacecraft jitter (high frequency motion) performance comparable to Kepler over 30 minutes, or one exposure. The measured Full- Width Half Maximum of the K2 point spread function, a measure of spacecraft jitter, is within 5% of the fine-point Kepler point-spread function across the entire field-of-view. Figure 8 provides a fit of the Kepler point-spread function to a K2 target close to the spacecraft boresight. Spacecraft jitter during two-wheel operation is therefore generally only a few percent larger than in the three-wheel Kepler mission and is not a major concern for K2 photometric precision.

The remaining component of photometric precision is solar-induced drift. This low-frequency motion due to solar pressure and subsequent thruster firings causes targets to drift across detector pixels and is the dominant factor in photometric precision after photon statistics. Thrusters are used to manage momentum by periodically resaturating the reaction wheels and to correct for solar-induced roll-angle drift. Thruster firings kept targets localized to within three pixels during early tests, and later testing demonstrated 1-pixel pointing using focal plane mounted fine guidance sensors.

For the purposes of providing a photometric precision measure that can be compared with the Kepler mission, an analysis was conducted on a typical uncrowded 12th magnitude K2 target. The parameters listed here for Kepler are not identical to the baseline mission photometric values specific to transit searches as presented in Koch et al. (2010). Here, we make use of the publicly available community software tools. To make our comparison, an identical analysis was performed on a Kepler target of the same magnitude. Both light curves are shown in Figure 9. The standard deviations of these two light curves, after normalization by a low-frequency filter, are listed in Table 3.

To compare K2's transit detection sensitivity with Kepler's, motion systematics and stellar variability are removed from these time series using a standard 48-hour Savitzky-Golay filter (Savitzky & Golay, 1964). The results are shown in Table 3 for photometric precision over a 6-hour exoplanet transit duration (ζ). Kepler operational experience indicates that 7ζ was a reasonable threshold for transit detection and is used for all K2 planet yields estimated above.

Figure 10 provides a comparison of K2's and Kepler's photometric precision as a function of target magnitude. The metric quantifies sensitivity to 6-hour transits and was calculated consistently for both target series. The comparison indicates that current K2 performance is within a factor 3-4 of Kepler's precision. The Kepler sample consists of quiet G dwarfs, selected randomly across the field of view. The K2 sample is also selected randomly across the full field-of-view, however the nature of each target is unknown; it is unlikely they are all quiet dwarfs, resulting in the scatter observed in the distribution.

As part of an early science demonstration with K2, WASP-28 was observed for 2.6 days in short cadence (1-min sampling) mode during an engineering test in January 2014. WASP-28 is a 12th magnitude, Sun-like star with a somewhat subsolar metallicity and known to host a Jupiter-sized exoplanet with an orbital period of 3.4 days (Anderson et al. 2014).

The K2 light curve (Fig. 11) was extracted from calibrated pixel data using an elliptical aperture that was allowed to recenter its position between exposures. In each exposure, we removed a local background determined from the median flux in nearby pixels. Finally, we passed the data through a median filter with a 1-day window.

Near the end of our short observation, we observed a single transit of the planet WASP-28b as it moved across the host star. We fit a limb-darkening transit model (Mandel & Agol 2002) to our observations and obtained planet parameters consistent with published values (Anderson et al. 2014). The residuals of the transit fit to the data show a point-to-point (rms) scatter of 0.16%. This equates to a 6-hr integrated noise level of 84 ppm.

Conclusion

K2 is a new mission both in spacecraft control and science opportunity. It makes use of the existing Kepler spacecraft and the large-area focal plane array to provide high-precision, long-duration photometric observations allowing new scientific discoveries in many areas of astrophysics. K2 is currently undergoing Campaign 0 and, if approved by NASA, is planned to continue observing a new field approximately every 3 months starting around 1 June 2014. K2's photometric precision and observing ability will far exceed ground-based telescopes and enable discoveries of high-value transiting exoplanets, a variety of aspects in stellar evolution, and new windows to explore in extragalactic science. Observing 4 to 5, 75-day campaigns each year, K2 will scrutinize the sky along the ecliptic plane.

K2's key science objectives were laid out above () and we have presented early science results () attesting to the mission's ability to carry out these goals. K2 is a low-cost space astrophysics mission capable of elucidating many aspects in stellar astrophysics across the H-R diagram and providing detailed observations of variable galaxies and early time observations of supernovae. In addition, K2's unique exoplanet survey will fill the gaps in duration and sensitivity between the Kepler and TESS missions, and offers pre-launch exoplanet target identification for JWST transit spectroscopy.