=

1.25in .125in .25in

Soft Cores in Late-Type Dwarf and LSB Galaxies from Hα Observations

Introduction

The current scenario for structure formation in the universe is based on the inflationary Cold Dark Matter (CDM) theory. High-resolution N-body simulations predict, for the virialized haloes, density profiles with central cusps with [formula] when r →   0 (Moore et al. 1999), even more cuspy than previous simulation results (Navarro, Frenk, and White 1997, hereafter NFW). These profiles are in conflict with the observations: rotation curves of late-type dwarf and LSB galaxies (DM dominated galaxies) seem to rule out singular halo profiles and are in good agreement with density profiles characterized by soft cores, central regions with constant density (de Blok & McGaugh 1997). On the other hand, van den Bosch & Swaters (2001) claim that these HI rotation curves are affected by beam smearing, concluding that the observed rotation curves are consistent with NFW model. A good spatial resolution (easily achievable with Hα observations) is necessary to explore the galaxy inner regions and rule out beam smearing. We show some preliminary results of our Hα observations for some dwarf and LSB galaxies. This work assumes [formula]=75 km s- 1 Mpc- 1.

Observations

Observations of late-type dwarf and LSB galaxies were carried out at the 3.6 m Telescopio Nazionale Galileo (TNG) both in photometric and spectroscopic mode using the instrument Dolores (scale = 0.275 Å pxl- 1, dispersion = 0.8 Å pxl- 1, λ∈(6200,7800) Å). In Table 1 we list the properties of some of the observed galaxies.

Our Hα data (stars in the figures) are plotted together with HI data (from literature, empty squares). As one can see, the HI data suffer of very little beam smearing. The solid lines are the best fits obtained by using the Burkert profile; the dashed lines are NFW profiles and the dotted-dashed lines are Moore profiles (CDM model). The numbers in parenthesis represent the normalized χ2 for each fit. For each galaxy is stated the spatial resolution for both the Hα and the HI data. For all the four galaxies, the Burkert profile is the best fit, while the Moore profile does not match data. New observations with high resolution new technology grating (VPHG, Conconi et al. 2001) are being planned.

Conclusions

Our preliminary analysis of Hα observations seems to rule out the CDM model in the inner regions of LSB and dwarf galaxies, showing evidence of soft cores.