The Higgs Particle: what is it, and why did it lead to a Nobel Prize in Physics?

Wolfgang Bietenholz Instituto de Ciencias Nucleares Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México A.P. 70-543, C.P. 04510 Distrito Federal, Mexico

Back in 1964, the theoretical physicists Franois Englert and Robert Brout, as well as Peter Higgs, suggested an explanation for the fact that most elementary particles -- such as the electron -- have a mass. This scenario predicted a new particle, which has been observed experimentally only just now at CERN (the European Organization for Nuclear Research). This discovery led to the Physics Nobel Prize 2013. Here we sketch in simple terms the concept of the Higgs mechanism, and its importance in particle physics.

To the best of our knowledge, the world consists of only very few types of elementary particles, the smallest entities of matter, which are indivisible. They are described successfully by the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics, a great scientific achievement of the 20th century. All phenomena observed so far with elementary particles are compatible with the SM, which made a large number of correct predictions.

There is one particle that the SM needs in order to work, which has been observed only very recently: the famous Higgs particle. After intensive and careful work, the collaborations ATLAS and CMS, working at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN near Geneva (Switzerland), reported in December 2011 first hints of its observation. These hints were further substantiated in 2012, and the discovery of the Higgs particle is now generally accepted. Therefore Englert and Higgs have been awarded the 2013 Nobel Prize in Physics for their correct prediction (Brout passed away in 2011).   Hence the Higgs particle is now in the focus of interest in physics, and also in popular science. Unfortunately, the latter often denotes it as the "particle of god", which sounds spectacular, but which does not make any sense whatsoever. If one assumes the creation of the Universe by some kind of god, then all particles are "particles of god", and otherwise none is linked to theology, but there is no way to assign this rôle specifically to the Higgs particle. Here we hope to disseminate a better view what this myth-enshrouded particle is about.

The SM is formulated as a Quantum Field Theory. In physics, fields are abstract functions of space and time, i.e. on each point and at any time some field value is introduced. This could be the temperature or the pressure in each point of a hall during one hour, or in an ocean during one year. A field may also have several components, which can be of a more abstract kind than real numbers. If we assign a specific field value to each space-time point under consideration, we obtain one configuration.

The occurrence of elementary particles is described by various types of fields. Their properties and dynamics are characterized by a function of the field configurations involved, known as the action. Classical field theory only considers one specific configuration of each field, the one that minimizes the action. For instance, if one performs this minimization for the electromagnetic fields, one obtains the Maxwell equations.

Quantum Field Theory, however, keeps track of the sum over all possible configurations. The one with minimal action or energy -- it could be the zero fields -- corresponds to the absence of particles, the vacuum. The additional energy that it takes for a fluctuation around this vacuum to generate just one particle is the mass of this particle.

Various fields -- and the associated particles -- may feel each other, i.e. they can interact, if the action contains a product of distinct fields that occur at the same point. In our understanding of the emergent complicated systems, symmetries play a key rôle. A symmetry is a group of transformations of the fields, which do not alter the action, so they are in general not observable. We distinguish global and local symmetries. A global symmetry allows us to change a field in the same way all over space and time -- like an Aerobic session where many people move simultaneously in the same manner. Local symmetries are even more stringent: here the field can be changed in each space-time point in a different way, and still the action remains invariant. That appears like a chaotic Aerobic session, where everyone moves as he or she likes.

If one requires such a local symmetry to hold, a huge a number of field transformations are allowed, and it is a delicate challenge to maintain invariance under all of them. For the actions that one usually starts with, this is not the case -- they do change under most local field transformations. However, one can repair the invariance by introducing additional fields, which transform exactly such that these changes are compensated. These are the gauge fields, which transmit an interaction between the "matter fields" that we had before. Moreover they represent own kinds of particles, such as the photon (the particle of light). In fact, the dominant interactions among the SM particles are transmitted by a set of gauge fields. This only works if the local symmetry is preserved exactly.

When this concept was developed, people noticed its virtues, but also a severe problem: the requirement of a local symmetry does not allow us to include any term in the action, which would simply specify some energy that it costs to "switch on the field", i.e. to deviate from a zero configuration, and therefore to represent a particle mass in its simplest form. Still we know that particles like the electron do have a mass. This was the puzzle that physics was confronted with in the 1950s, and which was later overcome by the famous Higgs mechanics.

The idea of this mechanism is that one does not necessarily need to refer to the zero field configuration. Instead one couples for instance the electron field to a new Higgs field, which is endowed with a self-interaction such that it takes its energy minimum for non-zero configurations. Then fluctuations away from this minimum require some energy, specifying a particle mass, while fully preserving the local symmetry. Now there is a whole set of non-zero field configurations corresponding to the minimal energy. The configurations in this set are related by local symmetry transformations, so physics is indeed invariant, and they all correspond to the same vacuum.

To provide an intuitive picture, we refer to a historic Gedankenexperiment (a "thought experiment"), known as "Buridan's donkey". Jean Buridan was a French scholastic philosopher of the 14th century, who was interested in logic, mechanics, optics, and in the existence and meaning of a "free will".

As a general background, even before classical mechanics was worked out mathematically, scholars often had an entirely deterministic view of the world. In fact, mechanics seems to suggest that the course of any future evolution is strictly determined by the present state of the Universe, given by the current positions and velocities of all objects. Then the future should follow an inevitable pattern, like a huge machine proceeding step by step in a fully predictable way. Without knowledge about quantum physics (and discarding sudden jumps against the Laws of Nature), it is not obvious to find an objection against this picture.

However, its strict application would even capture mental processes in the brains of animals and human beings. This conclusion appeared confusing, since it implies that our "free will" is a plain illusion. In the context of this discussion, Buridan's donkey was invented as a fictitious, extreme example. One imagines a hungry donkey, to whom one offers two piles of hay. However, they are fully identical and placed at exactly the same distance to its left and to its right. Hence the donkey has to make a decision for one direction in order to be able to eat. If nothing favors one of the piles, and its mind is fully deterministic, the poor donkey will stay in the middle and finally starve to death, although its salvation is so close. Taking a sudden decision corresponds to a process, which is denoted as "Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking" in Quantum Field Theory. Upon arrival at one of the piles, the donkey does not perceive the left/right symmetry (or "parity") anymore.

To translate this setting into the Higgs mechanism, we should better talk about a thirsty donkey in the center of a circular water ditch. Now there is a continuous set of favored positions -- corresponding to the energy minimum -- anywhere next to the ditch. If we sum over all possible positions (all possible "donkey field configurations"), these favored positions provide the statistically dominant contributions. So if we evaluate the expectation value of its water supply, we conclude that the quantum donkey is better off than its classical cousin: it is able to drink. This reveals the importance of Quantum Field Theory: in fact, it can be live saving!

Once the donkey has attained the water, it can freely move along the ditch and keep on drinking. This kind of motion keeps the energy at its minimum. The corresponding fluctuation of the donkey field configuration does not cost any energy, hence it corresponds a massless particle, known as a Nambu-Goldstone boson.

If we now couple the donkey field -- which takes the rôle of the Higgs field -- to other fields, such as the one of the electron, the shift of the favored position away from the center (i.e. away from the zero configuration) yields the electron mass.

With gauge fields included, all positions at the ditch (with the energy minimum) are physically identical, since they are now related by local symmetry transformations. Thus a walk along the ditch is not a real motion anymore, and the Nambu-Goldstone bosons disappear again. Instead some of the gauge particles pick up a mass, in a subtle indirect way, which fully preserves the local symmetry.

This happens for a suitable system a low temperature (in an infinite volume). The situation at high temperature could be sketched as pouring a lot of water into the area, hence the donkey does not need to move in order to drink. Then the procedure works with respect to its zero position, and no symmetry breaking occurs.

Let us repeat that any deviation away from the vacuum state costs energy, and here we capture the masses, for the electron and for other particles, without breaking the sacred principle of local symmetry. Several physicist noticed this property in the early 1960s. A corresponding mechanism was known in solid state physics, and applied also to particle physics by Franois Englert and Robert Brout (in Bruxelles, Belgium), and independently by Peter Higgs. In particular, it was Peter Higgs -- at that time a young lecturer at the University of Edinburgh (Scotland) -- who (encouraged by Yoichiro Nambu) pointed out that this mechanism, when applied to particle physics, brings about a new particle, which should be observable. Its mass, however, could not be predicted, and the emerging mass of the other SM particles neither. This may be considered as a short-coming of the SM: it contains a number of free parameters (about 26, neutrino masses included), which one would like to reduce. On the other hand, for describing practically the whole Universe, this number is not alarming. For comparison, many fashionable theories beyond the SM (like "supersymmetry") do not only lack any observational support, but they introduce in addition an avalanche of further free parameters.

Now the observation of the Higgs particle has been confirmed, so we can feel proud of a very well-established and elegant theory that describes all the elementary particles that we know of. So are we then done, and physicist will end up unemployed?

Not really, even the great SM has its short-comings, that we still have to work on:

It does not capture all interactions: the most obvious one in contemporary life, gravity, is not included. Intensive attempts (over several decades) to incorporate it have failed. Gravity is described successfully by a different theoretical framework, Einstein's Theory of General Relativity, which seems simply incompatible with Quantum Field Theory. While this is an outstanding challenge, for practically all issues in particle physics it can be ignored, since gravitational effects are usually negligible in the microscopic context (an exception was the very early Universe).

We have nowadays indirect but clear evidence of further ingredients to the Universe, denoted as Dark Matter and Dark Energy. Their nature is mysterious, and the SM cannot capture them -- another tremendous challenge to work on.

Even with known matter -- consisting of the SM particles -- complex structures, as they occur for instance in biology, are not simply understood based on the SM as the fundamental theory. Here a deep understanding of the collective behavior of many particles has to be supplemented, which has been accomplished only in part.

Finally the SM has an intrinsic reason for being incomplete. A naïve treatment of Quantum Field Theories yields infinities in quantities that we want to compute. They diverge when we take field fluctuations at all energy scales into account. We can render them finite by introducing an energy cutoff, which should be done in a subtle way, preserving again the local symmetries. In some cases we can later -- in the final result for physical observables -- remove this cutoff by sending it to infinity. However, in case of the Higgs sector of the SM this does not work: it would lead to a decoupling of the Higgs field from all other fields, and therefore again to vanishing particle masses; that property is known as triviality.

So we have to live with such an energy cutoff, which is acceptable as long as it is far above the Higgs particle mass, but not high enough to render the Higgs field "trivial", i.e. free of interactions. This implies that the validity of the SM is limited to a certain energy range -- at even higher energies it requires the extension to a superior theory, that we do not know yet. The specialized literature suggests candidate theories in abundance, but so far none has been substantiated.

Nevertheless, even if we find one day corrections to the SM (under extreme conditions), it will always remain the appropriate description of particle physics in the energy range, which is most relevant to us -- just like Newton's theory of gravity, or the continuous description of thermodynamic systems, remain highly useful, although they are not exact.

I am indebted to Aline Guevara and Eduardo Serrano for their assistance with the illustrations. A shorter Spanish version of this article has been published -- together with Daniella Ayala García -- in the Boletín de la Sociedad Mexicana de Física, vol. 26 no. 3 (2012) pp. 161-166.