The Biggest Explosions in the Universe

Introduction

Recently, there has been renewed interest in the long-standing theoretical possibility that supermassive stars (SMSs), with masses of 104-106  M[formula] inhabited the early universe (see e.g., Volonteri 2012) and their possible fates (e.g., Iben 1963; Fowler & Hoyle 1964; Appenzeller & Fricke 1972; Shapiro & Teukolsky 1979; Bond et al. 1984; Fuller et al. 1986).

One of the main motivations for their study comes from observations of quasars at z ≃6-7 which are inferred to be powered by black holes (BHs) with masses exceeding 109  M[formula] (e.g., Willott et al. 2003; Fan et al. 2006; Mortlock et al. 2011). Given the short time (<  800  Myr) available for such massive BHs to grow via accretion from their initial 'seed' masses, as derived from the most recent cosmological parameters inferred by e.g., the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (Komatsu et al. 2011), and the suppression of BH growth due to the strong radiative feedback from both stars (e.g., Whalen et al. 2004; Wise & Abel 2007; O'Shea & Norman 2008) and the BHs themselves (e.g., Pelupessy et al. 2007; Alvarez et al. 2009; Milosavljevi et al. 2009; Jeon et al. 2012; Park & Ricotti 2012), it now appears more likely than ever that the seeds of the most massive early BHs must have been quite massive themselves (e.g., [formula]M[formula]; see Johnson et al. 2012a; also e.g., Shapiro 2005; Volonteri & Rees 2006; Natarajan & Volonteri 2012). Whereas the majority of the first, Population (Pop) III stars may have had masses of ~  20-500  M[formula] (e.g., Abel et al. 2002; Bromm & Larson 2004; Yoshida et al. 2008; Greif et al. 2011), the best candidates for the seeds of SMBHs are thus much more massive (and rare) supermassive primordial stars.

An additional, and independent, reason to consider SMSs in the early universe is that the conditions required for their formation are now thought to be realized much more often than was previously assumed. The most widely discussed avenue for the formation of SMSs is via the direct gravitational collapse of hot ([formula]K) primordial gas in so-called atomic cooling dark matter (DM) halos at [formula] (e.g., Bromm & Loeb 2003; Begelman et al. 2006; Lodato & Natarajan 2006; Spaans & Silk 2006; Regan & Haehnelt 2009; Choi et al. 2013; Latif et al. 2013a,b). In this scenario, the gas in the protogalaxy remains at the virial temperature of ~   104  K because H2 molecules have been photodissociated by the Lyman-Werner (LW) background, leading to the rapid formation of SMSs via the accretion of gas at rates ~  102-103 times higher than in the formation of most Pop III stars from H2-cooled gas. The flux of radiation required to keep the gas H2-free depends on its spectrum, with lower fluxes required if it is produced by metal-enriched stars instead of Pop III stars (e.g., Shang et al. 2010). Recent work by independent groups has shown that Pop II star-forming galaxies in the early universe are able to produce sufficient H2-dissociating radiation to prevent the cooling of primordial gas in a substantial fraction of atomic cooling halos, thereby leading to the seeding of these halos with SMSs that can collapse into BHs (see Dijkstra et al. 2008; Agarwal et al. 2012; Petri et al. 2012; Johnson et al. 2013). Indeed, Agarwal et al. (2012, 2013) find that a large fraction of the SMBHs in the centers of galaxies today may have been seeded by SMSs. Strengthening these conclusions are other recent results which suggest that lower LW fluxes may be required for the formation of SMSs, due to a reduced role of H2 self-shielding (Wolcott-Green et al. 2011) and the presence of significant turbulence or magnetic fields (Van Borm & Spaans 2013).

Complementary studies have been undertaken to understand the growth and evolution of SMSs, as well. Modeling the growth of accreting protostars with masses up to ≃103  M[formula], Hosokawa et al. (2012) have shown that they emit little high energy radiation that could halt their continued accretion, and Inayoshi et al. (2013) have shown that pulsational instabilities are likewise unable to halt their growth. Johnson et al. (2012b) modeled the growth of SMSs to much higher masses and showed that, even if they are able to emit the copious ionizing radiation characteristic of main sequence Pop III stars, which may occur once the accretion rate becomes sufficiently low (Schleicher et al. 2013), radiative feedback is not able to stop their growth up to at least ~  105  M[formula]. At the highest accretion rates expected for these objects ([formula]M[formula] yr- 1; Wise et al. 2008; Shang et al. 2010; Johnson et al. 2011), the masses of primordial SMSs are only limited by the [formula]Myr that they have to accrete gas before they collapse to BHs (Begelman 2010).

Whereas the majority of SMSs are expected to collapse to black holes with little or no associated explosion (e.g., Fryer & Heger 2011; see also Fuller & Shi 1998; Linke et al. 2001), it is possible that some fraction instead explode as extremely energetic supernovae (SNe; e.g., Fuller et al. 1986; Montero et al. 2012; Whalen et al. 2012a, 2013d). In particular, Heger et al. (2013) have found from stellar evolution calculations including post-Newtonian corrections to gravity that SMSs with masses in a narrow range around ≃55,000  M[formula] end their lives as extraordinarily luminous SNe. With energies of almost 1055  erg, these thermonuclear explosions are among the most energetic in the history of the universe.

Here we expand on the radiation hydrodynamics simulations presented by Whalen et al. (2012a) and simulate the long-term evolution of a SMS SN in its cosmological environment, in order to show how these gargantuan explosions impact both the formation of the first galaxies and the chemical signature of the first stars. In the next section, we describe the multi-scale simulations that we have carried out to model the evolution of the explosion from its breakout from the surface of the star to the propagation of the blast wave into the intergalactic medium (IGM). In Section 3, we present our results on the energetics and dynamics of the explosion, as well as on metal enrichment and second-generation star formation. In Section 4, we conclude with a brief discussion of our results.

Simulation Setup

Here we describe the two simulations that we have carried out. The first is a 1-D radiation hydrodynamics calculation using the Los Alamos National Laboratory RAGE code (Gittings et al. 2008) which allows to track the propagation of the SN blast wave out to several parsecs from the explosion site, deep within the host atomic cooling halo. For the second, we map the results of the first into a 3-D cosmological simulation using the GADGET hydrodynamics code (Springel et al. 2001; Springel & Hernquist 2002). Our use of these two simulation codes for the phases of the SN in which they are most well-suited to accurately model the explosion, from small (AU) scales to large (kpc) scales, constitutes a significant improvement over previous cosmological simulations of SN feedback.

Stellar and Early Supernova Evolution

For the SMS progenitor of the SN we adopt the 55,000  M[formula] stellar model described in Whalen et al. (2012a), which was evolved until the onset of explosion, using the Kepler code (Weaver et al. 1978; Woosley et al. 2002). The explosion was then followed using Kepler and was confirmed (Chen et al., 2013) using the CASTRO code (Almgren et al. 2010). The explosion completely disrupts the star and yields an explosion energy of 7.7 ×   1054 erg (Heger et al. 2013). The RAGE code is then used to simulate the SN from the breakout of the shock from the surface of the star until the blast wave has propagated through a circumstellar medium with a density [formula]cm- 3 (and a density profile [formula] r- 2) out to several parsecs from the explosion site. Up to this point, the stellar evolution calculation and the simulation of the early phases of the SN are the same as described in Whalen et al. (2012a), to which we refer the reader for more detailed discussion of the calclulations (see also Frey et al. 2013).

The blue curves in Figure 1 show the velocity (left panel) and density (right panel) profiles of the SN ejecta at the end of the RAGE simulation, at which point the shock has propagated out to 6  pc from the explosion site. The 55,000  M[formula] of ejecta, 23,000  M[formula] of which is heavy elements produced during the evolution and explosion of the progenitor, are traveling at almost 10,000  km  s- 1 outward from the center of the host atomic cooling halo. It is from this point that we map these velocity and density profiles into a self-consistently evolved atomic cooling halo in a much larger cosmological volume.

Cosmological Blast Wave

To simulate the subsequent evolution of the SN blast wave in the appropriate cosmological environment, we map the velocity and density profiles obtained from the smaller-scale RAGE simulation into the center of a 4  ×  107  M[formula] atomic cooling DM halo, the type of which is expected to host the formation of SMSs in the early universe. The halo is identified in a 1  Mpc3 (comoving) cosmological volume which has been evolved from z  =  100 down to z≃15 under the influence of a uniform, elevated H2-dissociating (Lyman-Werner; LW) radiation field, which prevents the gas from cooling and is assumed to lead to formation of a single SMS. Further details of the cosmological simulation up to this point are described in Johnson et al. (2011), who considered the impact of the alternative end state of such a SMS, a rapidly accreting BH.

To map the output of the (Eulerian) RAGE simulation into the (Lagrangian) smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) GADGET simulation, we assigned the central 460 SPH particles, constituting the 55,000  M[formula] of gas within ≃6  pc of the densest particle in the halo, outward (radial) velocities and hydrogen number densities so as to match those from the RAGE simulation. The fits that we obtain are shown in Fig. 1, with the inner 55,000  M[formula] in SPH particles constituting the ejecta denoted by orange triangles and the unpertured particles residing in the outskirts of the halo denoted by black circles. Whereas we fit the velocity profile very well, due to the mapping from an Eulerian to Lagrangian code the density profile is somewhat noisier. Nonetheless, the basic features of the density profile containing the vast majority of the mass are represented, and the overall energy and momentum are also well-matched. From the initial conditions shown in Fig. 1 we restart the cosmological SPH simulation, the results of which we present in the next section.

Beyond mapping into it the blast profile of the SMS SN, we have chosen to leave the gas in the host halo otherwise unchanged. We have made this simplifying choice, in light of the large uncertainties in the radiative output of rapidly accreting SMSs, due to which it is unclear how the radiation emitted during the brief (~  2  Myr) lifetime of the star will impact the medium within the host halo. Even if the star emits copious ionizing radiation, as main sequence Pop III stars are expected to do, it may be that the H  ii region created by the star is confined to the innermost regions of the halo (Johnson et al. 2012; see also Hosokawa et al. 2012 on the possibility of even less energetic radiation being emitted during the protostellar phase). It is possible, on the other hand, that ionizing radiation is able to escape out into the halo, if the accretion flow is highly anisotropic (e.g., due to the presence of an accretion disk; e.g., McKee & Tan 2008), or if accretion is intermittent (e.g., Clark et al. 2011; Smith et al. 2011; Vorobyov et al. 2013), in which case radiation could break out during periods of reduced accretion.

Whereas the small-scale structure of the interstellar gas in the simulation we present here is subject to the limited resolution of the cosmological simulation into which we place the expanding blast wave, we note that at sub-resolution scales ([formula]pc) it is possible that a substantial amount of energy in the explosion is radiated away (e.g., Kitayama & Yoshida 2005; Whalen et al. 2008; de Souza et al. 2011; Vasiliev et al. 2012). We shall address how such additional radiative losses would affect the dynamics of the blast wave and the metal enrichment of the host halo and IGM in future work.

Results

Here we present the results of our cosmological hydrodynamics simulation, with particular attention paid to the dynamics of the expanding blast wave and to the enrichment of the IGM by the metal-rich SN ejecta.

Dynamics and Energetics

The injection of almost 1055 erg at a single explosion site has a dramatic impact on the host halo. Figure 2 shows the properties of the gas in the vicinity of the halo, as a function of the distance from the explosion site at its center. As the left-most panels show, the blast results in the complete evacuation of high-density (n [formula]cm- 3) gas within 10  Myr, with the material overtaken by the shock being carried out beyond the virial radius of the halo (at [formula]pc) at up to ≃103  km  s- 1. This material is also shock heated to temperatures up to ~  108  K, resulting in its almost complete ionization, as shown in the right-panels. The gas, however, rapidly cools due to inverse Compton scattering of CMB photons, H and He atomic line emission, and bremsstrahlung, as also found (using the same GADGET code) in the less-energetic (1052  erg) pair instability supernova (PSN) explosion in a [formula]M[formula] DM halo simulated by Greif et al. (2007), as well as in the 1-D calculation of a very energetic (1054  erg) Pop III SN in a slightly less massive (107M[formula]) DM halo presented in Kitayama & Yoshida (2005).

As shown in Figure 3, most (≃90  %) of the 7.7  ×  1054  erg initially in the blast is radiated away via these processes within 104  yr. Nevertheless, the momentum of the blast is conserved and the shock continues to propagate into the IGM, sweeping up the majority of the mass after ≃1  Myr. By 50  Myr, at which time ≃99  % of the energy has been radiated away, the shock has propagated out to ≃5-10  kpc and has swept up almost 107  M[formula].

Figure 4 shows the properties of the gas in the vicinity of the explosion site within a 400  pc (comoving) slice of the cosmological volume, at 1  Myr, 10  Myr and 50  Myr after the explosion of the SMS. Comparing the radial velocity field (second column from the left) to the cosmological density field (far left column), it is clear that the blast wave propagates most rapidly into the low-density voids while its progress is halted in the direction of the high-density filaments, at the intersection of which lies the host halo. Figs. 2 and 4 also show the same general trend that, at late times, the most strongly shock-heated and highest-velocity material is located behind the shock front several kpc from the explosion site. The cooler material within the (≃1  kpc) virial radius of the host halo is able to begin recollapsing after 50  Myr. As we discuss next, this gas is likely to form second-generation stars that are enriched to fairly high metallicities.

Metal Enrichment and Second-Generation Star Formation

As is also expected for less energetic PSNe from Pop III stars with masses of ~  200M[formula] (e.g., Heger et al. 2003), a large fraction of the ejecta from our SMS SN consists of heavy elements. In particular, ≃23,000  M[formula] of newly-synthesized metals are ejected in the explosion. These heavy elements are mixed with the primordial gas, enriching it to relatively high metallicity.

Figure 5 shows the average metallicity to which the gas in the vicinity of the explosion site is enriched by the ejecta, after 1  Myr, 10  Myr and 70  Myr. As the blast wave propagates outward into the low-density IGM gas at greater and greater radii becomes enriched. As metals are carried out of the host halo, metallicities at the smallest radii fall. After 70  Myr, however, the average metallicity of the gas out to almost 10  kpc (physical) is enriched to of the order of 10- 2  Z[formula], and the densest gas which is recollapsing into the host halo is enriched to ≃0.05  Z[formula]. As shown in Figure 6, by 70  Myr the gas at the center of the SN remnant, shown in Figure 7, has recollapsed to densities of [formula]cm- 3, significantly more dense than the highest-density (n ≃10  cm- 3) gas that remained within the virial radius of the host halo ~  10  Myr after the SN. Not only is the gas recollapsing after 70  Myr, but, as shown in the right panel of Fig. 6, a portion of the SN ejecta is entrained in this gas. If this ejecta is well-mixed with the dense primordial gas, then we expect its metallicity to be ≃0.05  Z[formula], as indicated in Fig. 5.

Gas enriched to such a high metallicity is predicted to readily fragment into low-mass stars (e.g., Bromm et al. 2001; Santoro & Shull 2006; Schneider et al. 2006), even in the presence of the elevated LW background radiation field expected in regions of the universe where SMSs form (e.g., Omukai et al. 2008). Therefore, we expect that second-generation stars would form from this SMS SN-enriched gas, and that a large fraction of these would have masses low enough ([formula]M[formula]) that they could still be present in the Galaxy today. While the nucleosynthetic signature of very massive Pop III pair-instability SNe (i.e., 140-260  M[formula]) has yet to be uncovered in extremely metal-poor stars (Cayrel et al. 2004; Beers & Christlieb 2005; Frebel et al 2005; Lai et al 2008; Joggerst et al 2010; Joggerst & Whalen 2011), it may have been found in high-redshift damped Lyman alpha absorbers (Cooke et al. 2011), and a number of metal-poor stars in a recent extension to the SEGUE survey have now been selected for spectroscopic followup on suspicion that they too may harbor this pattern (Ren et al. 2012). Furthermore, most stars forming in the ashes of very massive primordial SNe were likely enriched to metallicities above those targeted by surveys of metal-poor stars to date (Karlsson et al. 2008), and our simulations predict that second-generation stars formed from gas enriched by SMS SNe will have metallicities above 10- 2  Z[formula], which are also above this threshold. We conclude that, while SMS SNe are almost certainly rare events, their chemical signature might well be found in some of the ancient but not very metal-poor stars inhabiting our Galaxy today.

Discussion and Conclusions

We have carried out a multi-scale simulation of the explosion of a 55,000  M[formula] SMS, which, with an energy approaching 1055  erg, is among the biggest explosions in the history of the universe. With our multi-code approach, we have captured self-consistently, and for the first time, the essential radiation hydrodynamic features of the explosion at early times and the interaction of the blast wave with its host protogalaxy and with the IGM at later times.

Although the atomic cooling halos expected to host the formation of SMSs are at least two orders of magnitude more massive than the DM halos in which the first primordial stars are expected to form, we have found that these SMS SNe are energetic enough to completely evacuate them of dense gas. The metal-enriched ejecta is dispersed well beyond the ~  1  kpc virial radius of the host halo, out to ~  5-10  kpc into the low-density IGM, after ~  50  Myr. By this time, ~  99  % of the kinetic energy in the explosion has been radiated away; nonetheless, the expansion of the shock into the IGM continues even at these late times, as the remaining kinetic energy is still comparable to that expected for a ~  200  M[formula] Pop III PSN.

Because of the deep potential well of the halo and ongoing accretion from filaments, after 70  Myr a fraction of the metal-enriched gas in the SN remnant, shown in Fig. 7, has recollapsed to high densities. Given the relatively high metallicity of this gas (~  0.05  Z[formula]), it is most likely that it will fragment vigorously and form a cluster of second-generation stars. Enriched to this metallicity, any of these stars which survive to the present-day would exhibit metallicities much higher than the most metal-poor stars that have been found in surveys of the Galactic halo. Indeed, although SMS SN are likely rare events, it is possible that their chemical signature could be found in very old, relatively high-metallicity Pop II stars which inhabit the Milky Way today (or in present-day dwarf galaxies; Frebel & Bromm 2012). As we expect SMS SNe to produce very little 56Ni (Heger et al. 2013), their chemical signature may be distinguishable from those of most very massive (i.e., 140-260  M[formula]) Pop III explosions (PSNe), which can produce iron-group elements (Heger & Woosley 2002). Similar to these PSNe, however, SMS SNe would not make any s-process or r-process contributions.

Finding the chemical signature of SMS SNe in low-mass, long-lived stars (or in the IGM; see e.g., Cooke et al. 2011) would be one way of verifying that such exotic events occurred in the early universe. Another possibility is that these gargantuan explosions could be found in all-sky surveys such as those planned for the Wide-field Infrared Survey Telescope (WFIRST) and the Wide-field Imaging Surveyor for High-redshift (WISH), as shown recently by Whalen et al. (2012a). Given that SMSs are expected to form in regions subjected to a large flux of LW radiation from nearby (within ~  10  kpc; Dijkstra et al. 2008; Agarwal et al. 2012) star-forming galaxies, detection of SMS SNe would pinpoint locations on the sky where rapidly-forming first galaxies could be found in follow-up observations by the James Webb Space Telescope. Indeed, these explosions are so large that the SN remnants they leave behind, as shown in Fig. 7, are likely to be many times larger than, and in fact are likely to envelop, any such neighboring star-forming galaxies.

Could later stages of SMS SNe be detected by other means? They might appear in the radio at 21  cm. Meiksin & Whalen (2013) recently found that synchrotron emission from hypernovae in relatively dense media will be visible at 21  cm to existing radio facilities such as eVLA and eMERLIN in addition to the Square Kilometer Array (SKA). With their much higher energies and similar circumstellar densities, SMS SNe may be much brighter in the radio and detectable in all-sky surveys in spite of their small numbers. We are now calculating the radio signatures of SMS SNe in z  ~  15 protogalaxies.

Likewise, Oh et al. (2003) and Whalen et al. (2008) examined the potential imprint of Pop III SNe on the cosmic microwave background (CMB) via the Sunyayev-Zeldovich (SZ) effect. They found that a population of 140-260  M[formula] PSNe might impose excess power on the CMB on small scales, but with two caveats. First, the explosions must occur in large H  ii regions because the SN shock must still be hot by the time it encloses a large volume of CMB photons. Explosions in dense media dissipate too much heat to have an appreciable SZ signature or upscatter many CMB photons. Second, although a population of Pop III SNe might collectively impose features on the CMB individual remnants achieve radii just below the current resolution of Atacama Cosmology Telescope or the South Pole Telescope. Our models explode in dense environments and at redshifts at which inverse Compton cooling losses are lower than for the first SNe, but they eventually reach radii that would allow them to be resolved by current instruments. We are currently evaluating the SZ signatures of SMS SNe.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy through the LANL/LDRD Program, and JLJ acknowledges the support of a LDRD Director's Postdoctoral Fellowship at Los Alamos National Laboratory. The RAGE and GADGET simulations were carried out on the LANL Institutional Computing clusters Pinto and Mustang, respectively. DJW acknowledges support from the Baden-Württemberg-Stiftung by contract research via the programme Internationale Spitzenforschung II (grant P- LS-SPII/18). AH and KC were supported by the US DOE Program for Scientific Discovery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC; DE-FC02-09ER41618), by the US Department of Energy under grant DE-FG02-87ER40328, by the Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics (JINA; NSF grant PHY08-22648 and PHY110-2511). AH acknowledges support by an ARC Future Fellowship (FT120100363) and a Monash University Larkins Fellowship. KC was supported by a KITP/UCSB Graduate Fellowship and by a UMN Stanwood Johnston Fellowship. The authors thank Avery Meiksin for helpful discussion. Work at LANL was done under the auspices of the National Nuclear Security Administration of the U.S. Department of Energy at Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC52-06NA25396.