A Revised Publication Model for ECML PKDD

Introduction

We propose a new conference/journal publication model, the main feature of which is the creation of a journal track that allows all-year submissions to the conference. We would like to adopt this model at ECML PKDD 2013, but hope it will be useful beyond this conference. We start this text with arguments why a new model is needed. Next, we summarize the goals we wish to achieve, and the basic ideas underlying our model. We end with a detailed description of how we intend to implement it.

Motivation

Computer Science is atypical as a scientific field, in that it focuses on publishing at conferences, rather than journals. There is a growing discontent, internationally and in various subfields of computer science, with this tradition. Many argue that the conference-oriented publication system has reached its limits, and is breaking down. See the Appendix [\ref=arguments] and the bibliography for detailed arguments. In particular the ideas of Halpern and Parkes (2011) are very similar to ours. Briefly, in its current form, the system leads to reviews of highly variable quality; proliferation of conferences (such that the main purpose of conferences, bringing the community together, is lost); high reviewing workloads; slower reviewing for journals; decrease of information content of conferences and journals alike; lengthy journal articles; confusion among scientists in interdisciplinary contexts; unfair evaluations of academics.

The model adopted in most other domains of research, where conferences serve as community meetings and journals as the main publication channel, suffers less from the above shortcomings. Full papers are reviewed more thoroughly, with multiple reviewing rounds when necessary; there is less confusion about the expected standards; there is no artificial limit on the number of submissions that can be accepted; the total reviewing workload is lower (fewer different versions of papers are reviewed); journal articles are more concise (they need not "significantly extend" previous full-length versions). The main problem with journals, in computer science, seems to be the processing time: journal reviewing tends to take much longer than conference reviewing.

There have been several initiatives to address these issues. ECMLPKDD has experimented with selecting papers for exclusive publication in journals; this resolves some of the mentioned issues, but not all. SIGGRAPH and ICLP have taken similar initiatives to directly publish conference papers in journals. IJCAI'13 will have a track in which Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research articles will be presented that were not published in any form at a conference. Several conferences (AAAI, IJCAI, ECMLPKDD'12) are introducing NECTAR tracks in which important papers published in related communities can be presented. VLDB has moved to a journal-reviewing-like model. Changes towards different publication models have been considered for ICML and NIPS, but have not been implemented up till the 2012 editions. ACML'12 has introduced a system with two yearly submission deadlines for the conference track, allowing for resubmissions. The ACL conference on computational linguistics has moved to the VLDB system from 2012.

Goals

The model that we propose for ECML PKDD 2013, aims at achieving four main goals.

Further increase the quality of full paper presentations at the conference, by improving the quality of reviewing and providing more visibility to top contributions at the conference.

Further increase the quality of journals, by evaluating a new model for journal reviewing that combines quality with speed.

Make the conference more inclusive, by allowing for a broader set of contributions to be presented at the conference, albeit not as journal publications.

Reduce the "conference versus journal" dilemma that authors face.

Even though our goals are ambitious, we would like the implement the new system by the smallest possible changes to the current ECMLPKDD system. These changes are

safe: the current procedures for conference and journal reviewing remain in place, we only install an alternative track;

small: the alternative track is quite similar in spirit to previous ideas of selecting papers for inclusion into a journal directly;

advantageous, both to the ECML/PKDD conference as to the journals taking part in the initiative (MLj, DMKD).

The model is similar to the VLDB publication model, which is increasingly known within the computer science community.

Concepts of the Proposed System

The starting point of our proposal is that journal reviewing systems are the standard for high quality reviewing. The journal system has the following key distinguishing features:

articles can go through iterations of revisions before being accepted;

there is no submission deadline: articles can be submitted, evaluated, and accepted all year long;

reviewing for journals is typically done by senior researchers, who are rewarded for this by the prestige of being member of an editorial board.

We would like to see these principles applied to good conference publications as well. The easiest way to do this is to simply use the journal reviewing system for the conference. That is: authors who submit to the journal, can indicate that they would like to have their article considered for presentation at the conference. Submissions that are accepted, are then automatically accepted for the conference as well. The authors can thus draw additional attention to their work. Submissions may be considered not mature enough for publication in the journal, but interesting enough for presentation at the conference; these are again automatically accepted for the conference, without additional reviewing.

However, to make this successful, we need to ensure that the revision and reviewing cycles are short. Indeed, the duration of journal reviewing is a major reason, for many researchers, for preferring conference publication. We intend to achieve this by introducing some efficiency-increasing ideas from conference reviewing into the journal reviewing process.

These arguments could entail a solution in which ECMLPKDD publishes all contributions in one or more scientific journals. That is the VLDB model. We believe this may be a too big step for ECMLPKDD at this point; it may require increasing the capacity of existing journals, or the creation of new ones. Our initiative is intended to be a first, easily achievable step in this direction.

Technical Details

The proposed ECML PKDD submission system will have two tracks:

a proceedings track, which will have one deadline as usual, and whose proceedings will be published in lecture notes; a program committee will review these papers;

a journal track, which will allow for submissions all year long, and whose articles will be published either in the machine learning or data mining journals, or in the lecture notes; a guest editorial board will review these papers.

At this moment, ECML PKDD's proceedings track will not be modified significantly. The main change is the introduction of a journal track. Only papers submitted to the journal track can enter the machine learning and data mining journals. Papers that are not of journal quality, but of good conference quality, will be considered for inclusion in the proceedings even if submitted to the journal. Accepted papers are immediately published online, either using the journal's Online First facility, or on the conference website (until the proceedings are there). We are considering to mark papers that end up in the proceedings after journal quality reviewing. The benefits for submitting to the journal track are the following:

papers can be submitted all year long; the possibility to resubmit gives authors a higher chance of presenting their work at ECML PKDD, while the repeated reviewing cycles should ensure the quality of the papers;

multiple iterations of the same paper will be reviewed by the same reviewers, which should reduce the reviewing efforts;

papers will receive higher quality reviews, as the reviewing process is carried out by senior researchers;

papers are available online almost immediately after acceptance (whether for journal or conference).

In detail, we propose the following setup.

Guest Editorial Board

A Guest Editorial Board (GEB) will be appointed for the duration of one year, consisting of members of the editorial board of the machine learning and data mining journals, as well as additional senior researchers. GEB members will agree to the following:

timely reviewing of a limited number of articles that will be sent to them over the course of one year;

monitoring of their performance.

Monitoring reviewer's performance is expected to be important to ensure a timely reviewing process. The process will however be lenient to reviewers as long as the chairs are notified in advance. If reviewers do not meet their deadlines and do not notify the chairs well in advance, the assumption is that they will not be invited for next year's GEB. In the following, asterisks indicate points that will count towards positive or negative evaluation of GEB members.

Note that we explicitly do not limit the size of the GEB in advance. Even though we will start with a relatively small GEB, we intend to grow the editorial board as needed, depending on the popularity of the journal track. Our aim is to limit the number of articles that each GEB member has to review to at most 5.

Submission Procedure

We envision the following submission procedure:

There is a deadline on Sunday night, every two weeks.

The list of submissions is sent immediately to the GEB on Monday morning. Each member will receive a personalized mail that contains the following:

an overview of the number of articles he/she reviewed;

an average of the number of articles other editorial board members reviewed (once this number is high enough);

a list of submitted articles (titles & abstracts), each with a direct link on which the GEB member can click to show interest in this article.*

Furthermore, each GEB member will have the opportunity to post a comment on a submitted paper; these comments will not be shown to the authors, but can be seen as suggestions to the final reviewers; for instance, such a comment could be: "this reminds me of the work by author A, the reviewers should check this".*

Based on these bids, the paper is manually assigned to reviewers on Friday, taking into account possible conflicts of interests. Papers that did not receive a sufficient number of bids, will be allocated a reviewer.

The GEB member should accept or decline the task within the next week.*

The GEB member has 4 weeks for reviewing after being invited to review the paper, the deadline being on Friday.

On Wednesday morning before the deadline, the GEB member is reminded by email of the approaching deadline. The GEB member can request an extension of one week by reacting to this mail before Friday.

Any paper for which no response is received* is immediately allocated to another reviewer.

The chairs aim to decide within one week whether the article can be published in the journal. If positive, this decision is communicated to the editor-in-chief or a responsible action editor, who has to agree before the authors are notified. Accepted papers will be published online as soon as possible.

Overall, this would result in a turn around time of only 6 to 8 weeks. The VLDB experience suggests that this is realistic.

The last deadline that will allow for publication in the ECML PKDD 2013 journal track will be approximately 7 weeks before the deadline of the conference track. However, the chairs will not promise that reviewing will be finished within 7 weeks - authors are recommended to submit sufficiently early.

Note that the ECML PKDD program chairs will decide on accepted papers both for the conference and the journal track. They will ensure that papers in both tracks have the desired quality; the editors-in-chief of the journals cannot autonomously decide to accept a paper in the conference track.

Ratings

Reviewers will be given the opportunity to mark papers as follows:

Accept immediately in the journal.

Accept for the conference proceedings, but request revisions for the journal track.

Request revisions and allow resubmission to the journal track.

Reject.

In case a paper is rated (2), the authors will have to indicate whether they intend to resubmit to the journal track. If not, the paper will enter the procedure for a final version in the conference proceedings.

In case a paper is rated (3), the authors are also allowed to resubmit their paper to the conference track instead of the journal track. After the last ECML PKDD 2013 journal track deadline has passed, this will be the only possible way to publish their results at ECML PKDD 2013. Such submissions will be reviewed by the GEB members that reviewed the original submission.

In case a paper is rated (4), the paper will also not be accepted to the conference track.

Format of Submissions

Articles submitted to the journal track will have to be of journal quality. Hence, if experimental in nature, they will have to contain a sufficient number of experiments; if theoretical in nature, they will have to provide full proofs of their claims.

It will be possible to submit articles of any length to the journal track. However, only articles that adhere to a page limit of 20 pages in journal (DAMI/MLJ) style will be evaluated using the above described process, and will hence receive short review times. Articles beyond 20 pages will be treated as normal submissions to the corresponding journals; they cannot be forwarded to the proceedings and will typically not be reviewed in a short time.

By not imposing an overall page limit, we ensure that the quality of journal articles is not limited. At the same time, we do not believe it is reasonable to expect from reviewers that they provide high quality reviews for long papers within a short time.

We will encourage all authors to publish their full versions also in arXiv/CoRR, and aim to have permissions for this from Springer.

Relationships to the Proceedings Track

The proceedings track and the journal track clearly are not completely independent of each other. In particular, articles that are not revised in time for the journal track, may be resubmitted to the proceedings track. However, to reduce the reviewing load, such resubmissions from the journal track will be reviewed by the GEB members that reviewed the original submission. The number of reviews carried out by an GEB member will be recorded and taken into account when allocating proceedings submissions to reviewers; reviewers that reviewed a significant number of journal articles will not be asked to review proceedings submissions. Nevertheless, they will also be listed as members of the program committee; the program committee will automatically include all GEB members.

Further Changes to the Proceedings Track

There will be a separate deadline for the proceedings track. The setup of the proceedings track, such as its acceptance rate and its reviewing procedures (whether or not to have author response, ...) are in principle independent from the setup of the journal track. It would however be in the spirit of our proposal to accept a larger number of papers to the proceedings track and to reduce the selective pressure for this track. Other tracks, such as a demo track, an industrial track, or Nectar track, are under consideration.

Future Directions

We envision that the system can evolve in several directions after ECMLPKDD'13.

A specialized journal

ECMLPKDD can adopt the VLDB model and found a journal specific for ECMLPKDD, preferably open access in nature. This journal could be used for all full paper submissions; this journal may be indexed by conference indexing services to track the impact of ECMLPKDD. The present conference track reduces to a session for posters and short presentations on ongoing work.

Additional conferences join the system

The ML and DMKD journals continue to receive submissions for ECMLPKDD, but other conferences start using ECMLPKDD's procedure, effectively establishing an ECMLPKDD reviewing system in collaboration with these journals. At each resubmission the authors can indicate to which conference they wish to resubmit, allowing papers that not were not finished in time for ECMLPKDD to be considered in other conferences.

Additional journals join the system

To increase the number of papers that ECMLPKDD can publish in established journals, it may be an option that more journals are allowed to join the system (a special purpose ECMLPKDD journal possibly being one of them). Based on the reviews, the chairs of the reviewing system allocate papers to journals; this is similar to conferences in bioinformatics, which nowadays often have special issues in many journals.

The Old System

When our proposal is a failure, the journal track can be abolished and the conference track's acceptance rate can be decreased again.

Key to our proposal is that it can evolve in each of these directions, based on the evolution of the field as a whole in the coming years.

Arguments against the Conference System

The tables below summarize the arguments made against the conference system by several well-known computer scientists.