.sty

Introduction

It is commonly accepted that the AGN emission is due to gravitational release of energy by mass falling onto a super-compact object. Most of the attention is presently devoted to the geometry of the problem and to physical details in the attempt to explain some spectral characteristics and peculiarity of particular objects, rather than to answer to the fundamental question:

where does the accreting mass come from?

In this note, which is part of a more extensive work described elsewhere (Capuzzo-Dolcetta, 1993; Capuzzo-Dolcetta, 1996) I try to give an answer to this question, carrying evidence that spherical mass accretion on a compact object in form of dynamically decayed globular clusters in a (triaxial) elliptical galaxy can be the source of the power released by AGNs without invoking ad hoc assumptions.

Globular cluster spatial distribution in galaxies

It seems quite ascertained that the radial distribution of globular clusters is lees peaked than that of bulge stars. Recent WFPC2 HST observations of 14 elliptical galaxies (Forbes et al. 1996) confirm the general trend of flattening of the cluster distribution within ~  2.5 Kpc from the centre. This difference between the bulge and the globular cluster distributions may be ab initio or due to evolution of the cluster system distribution. This latter hypothesis is clearly the most "economical" and it has been positively checked by Capuzzo-Dolcetta (1993). Here I would point the attention to one of the consequences that the evolution of the globular cluster system (GCS) has in terms of mass carried to the galactic centre.

The globular cluster system evolution

The details of the general physical model can be found in Capuzzo-Dolcetta (1996) (see also Pesce , Capuzzo-Dolcetta and Vietri 1992, and Capuzzo-Dolcetta 1993).

Here I just recall that the GCS evolution in a diskless galaxy is due to the actions of dynamical friction by field stars and of the tidal interaction with a compact object in the centre of the galaxy. The relevant time scales (τdf, τtid) depend on the individual cluster initial energy, mass and mass density as well as on the galactic potential and velocity distribution plus (of course) on the nucleus mass (Mn). The ratio of the two time scales

[formula]

shows a competition between the two processes: dynamical friction is effective until a nucleus is accreted in mass enough to destroy the incoming clusters ([formula] is the cluster density averaged over its half-mass radius). This suggests the possibility of a self-regulated nucleus formation in a galaxy. Various points have to be investigated, among them:

(i) when τtid and τdf are sufficiently short to be relevant in the life of a galaxy?

(ii) is it possible to build up a compact nucleus in the galactic centre in the form of dynamically decayed globulars?

(iii) what fraction of the mass of frictionally decayed and tidally destroyed clusters is swallowed in the compact nucleus?

(iv) can a quasar-like emission be explained by such kind of spherical accretion?

A definite quantitative answer to question (ii) will require an accurate modelization; the answers to (i), (iii) (as well as to (iv)) have been given in Pesce et al. (1992), Capuzzo-Dolcetta (1993), Capuzzo-Dolcetta (1996), and will not be discussed here.

In what follows I limit myself to give support to the positive answer to question (iv).

The accretion model

Qualitatively: a black hole of given mass mbh stays at the galactic centre and swallows the surrounding stars which enter a destruction radius rd = max(rS,rt) where rS is the Schwarzschild's radius and rt the tidal-breakup radius

[formula]

with  < M*  >   and < R*  >   mass and radius of the typical star. The resulting rate of (spherical) mass accretion is [formula], which yields a gravitational luminosity

[formula]

(φ is the gravitational potential near rd). They crucially depend on the star density (ρ*) and velocity dispersion (< v2*  >  1 / 2) around the black hole through

[formula]

[formula]

[formula]

[formula]

where [formula] is the rate of stellar mass swallowed in the black hole and η is an efficiency factor, of the order of 10%. Of course the higher ρ* the higher [formula] while a high < v2*  >  1 / 2 favours nucleus accretion increasing the capture time rate but, contemporarily, decreases the swallowing cross section (3).

Capuzzo-Dolcetta (1996) with the help of a model similar to the one now described (but more detailed) showed that the nucleus accretion rate can easily increase up to few [formula] due to stars which belonged to frictionally decayed globular clusters and to tidally disrupted clusters. This mass accretion rate is of the order of that needed to sustain a quasar activity (note that the high velocity bulge stars cannot provide for more than [formula]).

Results

Here we report of some results of a model where the GCS is composed by clusters of same mass and the system has an initial density distribution and velocity dispersion equal to those of bulge stars' in a typical triaxial galaxy.

Figure 1 a) shows the time evolution of the nucleus luminosity for different choices of the initial black hole mass mbh0 (10, 102, 103, 106 [formula]). It is remarkable how, independently of mbh0 , the highest luminosity reached, Lmax, is similar (Lmax varies for a factor of 10 when mbh0 ranges between 10 to 106 [formula]). The nucleus luminosity has a short super-Eddington burst, a factor 103 brighter than the luminosity when a relatively slow dimming phase starts (the noise in the figure is real, due to the graininess of the problem amplified by the non-linear coupling of source and sink term in the dynamical equations). Of course Lmax is attained later for smaller values of mbh0, for it requires longer to accrete enough mass onto the nucleus. In all the cases the nucleus starts brightening at about 1 Gyr. At that age enough massive globulars have frictionally decayed to the centre and released stars to the black hole. A flatter increasing slope follows , due to that less massive incoming clusters feed less the nucleus. The nucleus continues increasing its mass and becomes, rather quickly, an efficient tidal destroyer of clusters capable (in some cases) to keep in its potential well a large fraction of the dispersed cluster' stars, which are eventually swallowed. Figure 1 b) shows that the central black hole mass stabilizes around a value (≈  5  ×  108 M[formula] in this model) which is about the same irrespectively its initial value.

Conclusions

I showed that a possible mechanism to accrete a compact nucleus placed in the centre of a triaxial galaxy is the swallowing of surrounding stars, which belong either to dynamically decayed clusters either to tidally destroyed ones. The quantitative relevance of this phenomenon, as well as its time scales, depend of course on the orbital structure of the GCS and on its mass and internal density spectrum: a "cold" system composed by massive, dilute clusters is the most affected by both dynamical friction and tidal erosion. In the model here presented, and deeply discussed in Capuzzo-Dolcetta (1996), the peak of mass accretion rate and the final value of the nucleus mass are remarkably independent (for a fixed typical globular cluster mass) of the initial black hole mass. What changes is the age of occurrence of the resulting luminosity peak (1013  ÷  1014 L[formula]) and of the flattening of the mass growth curve. It is indeed found that the black hole mass grows rapidly until it reaches a value of few 108 M[formula]; after that the mass accretion is much slower.