=20pc =24pt =0pt =10000

Observatories

Introduction

An astronomical observatory is a building, installation, or institution dedicated to the systematic and regular observation of celestial objects for the purpose of understanding their physical nature, or for purposes of time reckoning and keeping the calendar. The work at a bona fide observatory constitutes a main activity, not just an incidental one. Observatories gather data on celestial positions, motions, luminosities, or chemical composition which can be used as a basis for theories that describe what these celestial bodies are, where they are to be located in the sky, or how they evolve.

While the ancient Egyptians, Babylonians, Chinese, neolithic Britons, Greeks and Mayans made many observations of scientific and historical interest, their efforts were not carried out at observatories per se. In this article we shall concentrate on installations that were intended to be bona fide research centers.

Observatories in Islam

There was a strong motivation in medieval Islam to preserve the knowledge of the Greeks and to add to it, if possible. In a large city the existence of a hospital, a university, and a public library was considered sensible and desirable. Within this context, wherein knowledge and piety were highly encouraged and intertwined, the tradition of observatory building began during the reign of al-Mamūn, the seventh Abbasid caliph (813-833 AD). He organized a scientific academy in Baghdad called the House of Wisdom, which included a library and observatory. This was the most significant scientific endeavor since the establishment of the Alexandrian Museum in the 3rd century BC. A second observatory was built on the plains of Tadmor in Syria. al-Mamūn's astronomers measured the obliquity of the ecliptic (obtaining a value of 23o 33[formula]), concluded that the precession of the equinoxes amounted to 54 arcsec per year, determined that the Earth was 6500 miles in diameter, and produced tables of motion of the planets based on Ptolemy's work, but updated on the basis of new observations. Astronomical work continued in Baghdad under the ninth Abassid caliph, but then ceased.

A second scientific academy, the Hall of Wisdom, was established in Cairo in 1005. It lasted until 1171. An observatory was begun there in 1120 and nearly completed, but was ordered destroyed by the caliph in 1125 after the death of the vizier in charge of the observatory and its instruments. Apparently, serious conflicts had arisen between this vizier and the caliph, and it did not help that the superstitious populace presumed that trying to understand the motions of the planets was akin to delving into magic.

The Istanbul Observatory, completed in 1577, met a similar demise. Political back stabbing and superstitions regarding astronomy led to that observatory's destruction by 1580.

The two most successful and extensive Islamic observatories were those at Marāgha (in Azerbaijan, in modern-day Iran) and at Samarkand, in modern-day Uzbekistan. The Marāgha Observatory was built under the direction of Nar al Dn al-ūs (1201-1274). It was situated on the flattened top of a hill, covering 400 by 150 meters. Completed in 1264, it was active at least until 1304, perhaps until 1316. It was the first observatory whose activity did not greatly diminish after the death of its founder. While the motivation for the construction of the observatory was astrological, the prediction of future celestial events needed to be carried out on the basis of exact physical measurements. A significant number of instruments was built, amongst them equinoctial and solsticial armillary spheres, and a mural quadrant of radius 4.3 meters. The observatory's library at one time contained 400,000 volumes. The principal accomplishment at Marāgha was the compilation of the Ilkhanic Tables, which were tables of motion of the Moon, Sun, and planets. These explained some of the major shortcomings of Ptolemaic astronomy without, however, suggesting heliocentrism.

The most important astronomer of the 15th century was Ulugh Beg (1394-1449). For most of Ulugh Beg's life his father was the ruler of Transoxiana, a region situated between the River Oxus (Amur Darya) and the River Jaxartes (Syr Darya). This provided the son with the opportunity to indulge his passion for astronomy. As a young man Ulugh Beg visited the remains of the Marāgha Observatory, and he endeavored to build an even greater institution in Samarkand. As many as 70 astronomers were active there between 1408 and 1437. The largest instrument constructed was a sextant of radius 40 meters, a fixed instrument mounted on the north-south meridian which could achieve a resolution of several arc seconds, a value not to be exceeded until the invention of the telescope and the micrometer in the 17th century. This sextant was primarily used for observations of the Sun.

On the basis of new observations, Ulugh Beg and his fellow astronomers compiled a catalogue of the brightest 1000 stars visible at the latitude of Samarkand. No one since Ptolemy (ca. 150 AD) or perhaps as far back as Hipparchus had made such extensive stellar observations. Ulugh Beg's catalogue was most likely based on observations with a zodiacal armillary sphere graduated to 15 arc minutes, with interpolation to two-tenths of a mark, or 3 arc minutes. The typical positional accuracy in the catalogue is ±   16 arc minutes.

Briefly stated, the purpose of observatories in Islam was the production of astronomical ephemerides of the Sun, Moon, and planets, and possibly also the compilation of a star catalogue. Royal patronage was required. The Marāgha and Samarkand Observatories were intended to be permanent institutions. Centuries ago it was realized that astronomical research is necessarily open-ended. Better positional accuracy is always desirable, so new instruments have to be designed in order for positional accuracy to be improved. Instruments made of metal were found to last longer and give more consistent results than instruments made of stone or wood. In order to be useful, observations had to be carried out for specific purposes and according to specific methods.

China and India

At the very end of the 17th century one Louis Lecomte published his Memoirs and Observations of a Journey through China. He noted in some detail the vigilant activity carried out by astronomers at the Imperial Observatory in Beijing: "Five mathematicians spend every night on the tower in watching what passes overhead; one is gazing towards the zenith, another to the East, a third to the west, the fourth turns his eyes southwards, and a fifth northwards, that nothing of what happens in the four corners of the world may escape their diligent observation." Such activity had been going on for 3000 years. As a result, the Chinese had accumulated records pertaining to many hundreds of lunar and solar eclipses, observations of novae, supernovae, comets, meteor showers, aurorae, naked eye sunspots, and even a possible observation of Jupiter's moon Ganymede in 364 BC, nearly two millenia before the invention of the telescope! The first clock drive was built by the Chinese in 132 AD; it was powered by a constant pressure-head of water in a clepsydra, or water clock. The Chinese astronomer Yü Xi independently discovered the precession of the equinoxes in 320 AD, finding a value of about 72 arc seconds per year, two times the value found by Hipparchus. Sunspot records in the Chinese annals demonstrate the 11-year solar cycle.

Just as spices were transported along the caravan routes, so too was astronomical knowledge. Astronomers from Persia arrived in China in 719 AD. The astronomical ties between the mid-East and far East became quite extensive during the Yüan Dynasty (1271-1368). In 1267, only eight years after the founding of the Marāgha observatory, blueprints for seven instruments were sent to China. Actual models may have followed.

In 1270 the astronomer Guo Shoujing (1231-1316) built the first equatorially mounted instrument. After the Beijing Observatory was re-equipped in 1276 to 1279 under his direction, it was equal in stature to the Marāgha Observatory. The Chinese also operated an observatory at Nanjing.

The Chinese did not appreciate or understand the Greek geometrical models of planetary motions or the Arabic use of geometry, particularly spherical trigonometry and stereographic projection. However, three hundred years before Tycho Brahe became convinced that right ascension and declination were the "coordinates of the future", the Chinese were fully committed to their use. Just as the influence of the Emperor radiated in all directions, so the hour circles radiated from the pole, "like the spars of an umbrella." The Chinese laid out a system of 28 lunar mansions ( xiu), which were defined by the points at which these hour circles intersected the celestial equator.

One of the most important events in the history of Chinese science was the arrival of the Jesuits in 1600, towards the end of the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644). They had a very specific motivation. By demonstrating the superiority of Western science, they hoped to convince the Chinese of the superiority of Western religion. Western science clearly won out over the traditional Chinese and Muslim methods of predicting the solar eclipses of 15 December 1610 and 21 June 1629. In November of 1629 a new calendar bureau was established under the direction of the Chinese Christian convert Xu Guangqi, who supervised the work of fifty astronomers, many of whom converted to Christianity. However, in 1664, at the start of the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911), politics led to the dismissal of the Jesuits and most of the Chinese converts from the calendar bureau. Some of these astronomers were later beheaded.

The Jesuits regained favor in Chinese astronomy in 1669. From 1673 to 1676 the Beijing Observatory was re-equipped with a new set of Tychonic instruments, which are still in place today. However, the astronomical activities in China were hindered by several factors: 1) the interests of the Chinese were limited to calendrical revision; 2) for Catholics, such as the Jesuits, the Church's prohibition against discussing heliocentrism was in effect from 1616 to 1757; 3) the popularity of Tycho's hybrid geo-heliocentric model of the solar system in the minds of the Jesuits further eclipsed interest in Copernicanism; and 4) since the most fundamental motivation of the Jesuits was religious conversion, not scientific progress, they were not really interested in telescopes and telescopic observations. Meanwhile, back in Europe astronomers such as Jean Dominique Cassini and John Flamsteed (see .5.1 below) were breaking new ground in the realms of planetary and positional astronomy.

The most significant observatory construction in India was carried out under the direction of Jai Singh (1686-1743), a Hindu prince in the court of a Muslim Mogul emperor. Large instruments of masonry were constructed at Delhi, Jaipur, Ujjain, Benares, and Mathura. The largest instrument was a sundial 27 meters tall. Jai Singh wished to follow in the footsteps of Ulugh Beg. He hoped to minimize observational errors by using the largest instruments possible and felt that portable brass instruments were not the instruments of choice. Jai Singh's star catalogue was an update of Ulugh Beg's star catalogue, but apparently with no new observations. 4[formula] were simply added to Ulugh Beg's ecliptic longitudes to account for precession over 288 years.

Early European observatories

Astronomical observations were carried out in Moslem Spain at Cordova in the 10th century, at Toledo in the 11th century, and at Castille in the 13th century under the patronage of the Christian King Alfonso X. The Toledan astronomical tables were translated into Latin in the 12th century; Copernicus owned a copy of them. The Alfonsine Tables, which form the first state-sponsored astronomical ephemerides published for general use, were reprinted as late as 1641.

The first European observatory worthy of the name was built by Bernard Walther (1430-1504), a wealthy private citizen of Nuremberg, who was at the same time the pupil and patron of Regiomontanus (1436-1476). Together they found that the positions of the planets differed to a significant degree from the predictions of the Alfonsine Tables. Their observations of the comet of 1472 provided a basis for the modern study of comets. They printed astronomical treatises on a printing press set up in Walther's house. One such treatise by Regiomontanus laid out the "method of lunar distances" for determining longitude at sea. A significant innovation at Walther's observatory was determination of the time of observations by mechanical clocks instead of by astrolabes or armillary spheres. Observations with Walther's instruments exhibited an improved accuracy, to ±   10 arcmin.

Wilhelm IV (1532-1592), the Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, began systematic observations in 1561. In 1567 his father, the Landgrave of Hesse, died, and the landgraviate was divided up amongst the four sons. Wilhelm was compelled to take over the administration of his province, and had to lay aside his astronomical endeavors. In 1575, however, he was visited by Tycho Brahe and was inspired to resume observing.

Wilhelm constructed a number of metal instruments, amongst them an azimuthal quadrant of radius 0.4 m, a torquetrum, a sextant of radius 1.3 m, a quadrant of 1.5 m radius, and armillary spheres (see article on Pre- telescopic instrumentation). He demonstrated the superiority of metal instruments over wooden ones. Wilhelm's most significant innovation was the rotating dome; he observed from one built in a tower of his castle. His star catalogue of about 400 stars, though far short of the intended number of stars he had hoped to measure, was one of the first made in Europe.

The most significant observatory prior to the invention of the telescope was that of Tycho Brahe (1546-1601). It was situated on the 2000 acre island of Hven, in the Danish sound between Copenhagen and Elsinore. There Tycho built Uraniborg, the "castle of the heavens". It sat in the middle of a square 300 feet on a side and enclosed by a wall 22 feet high. The castle itself had two main levels and was taller than a seven story building. In addition to the observing rooms and verandahs on the upper level, it contained a dozen or so bedrooms, a dining room, library, chemical laboratory, and even a jail in the basement. Begun in 1576, it was completed in 1580. Over the north portal was an inscription, carved in stone: Nec fasces nec opes sola artis sceptra perennant (neither wealth nor power, but only knowledge, alone, endures). Uraniborg was the first scientific research institute in Renaissance Europe, and Tycho was the first full-time scientist.

At Uraniborg Tycho and his assistants used a dozen instruments. The one that produced the most accurate stellar positions was a mural quadrant of radius 2 m, which was located in the southwest room on the ground floor. A mural quadrant, of course, is attached to a wall, fixed on the celestial meridian. Being a quadrant located at latitude 55[formula], it could not be used to observe stars north of δ = 55.9 degrees. Its fine construction and the use of transversals allowed the determination of declinations with a resolution of 10 arc sec. Perhaps because of the success of this very instrument, a transition began at this time from positional instruments which could be used near the celestial meridian to those which were explicitly designed to do so.

An auxiliary observatory, Stjerneborg, was built in 1584 one hundred feet to the south of the main building. There were five new instruments, the largest of which was an equatorial armillary made of iron, which was 2.9 m in diameter and could be used to measure declinations with a resolution of 15 arc sec. Each of these five instruments was situated in a subterranean crypt. Three were sheltered by folding roofs. Two had revolving domes.

From observations at Hven Tycho discovered four inequalities in the Moon's motion, two in longitude (the "variation" and the annual equation with a period of one solar year), and two in latitude. His observations of Mars were used later by Kepler to discover the elliptical nature of planetary orbits. From observations of 1588 to 1591, he produced a catalogue of 777 stars with an improvement in positional accuracy of an order of magnitude. More than one of Tycho's instruments produced positional accuracies for his nine principal reference stars of ±   0.6 arc min. The average uncertainty of the (other) brighter stars in Tycho's catalogue is 1.9 arc min in ecliptic longitude and 1.2 arc min in ecliptic latitude. For the fainter stars the uncertainties amount to 2.8 and 2.6 arc min, respectively.

Tycho was able to afford such a magnificent observatory because his annual income from various fiefdoms was the equivalent of one percent of the Danish government's income. This continued for a period of nearly 30 years. Such funding in today's currency would support an observatory more expensive than the Hubble Space Telescope and ESO's Very Large Telescope combined. It was not just money, of course, that led to the improvement in instrumentation. More than one of Tycho's metal instruments required the workmanship of five or six people and three years.

Tycho's fortunes, both literally and figuratively, began to decline in 1588 after the death of Tycho's patron, the Danish king Frederick II. Tycho left Hven in 1597 and his observatory rapidly fell into decline.

Johannes Hevelius (1611-1687), the son of a prosperous brewer of Danzig (Gdansk), built what was for a short time the world's leading observatory. He copied a number of Tycho's instruments, constructing many quadrants and sextants of wood or copper. For observing the moon and planets he constructed refractors up to 150 feet in focal length, in which the objective was mounted on a tall mast. However, for stellar positions he clearly preferred the unaided eye, as he explicitly stated in his Machina Coelestis (1673). This precipitated a controversy with Robert Hooke, who was a strong advocate of telescopic sights. Edmund Halley was compelled to visit Danzig in 1679 to try to resolve the controversy. For two months Halley observed with a telescope fitted with sights while Hevelius used naked eye instruments. Their observations were of equal accuracy, slightly less than one arc minute. The Selenographia (1647) of Hevelius was a milestone in lunar mapping. His posthumous star catalogue (1690) contains the positions of 1564 stars.

The rise of national observatories

First era: 1576-1725

We may distinguish three eras of construction of national observatories. Tycho's island observatory was, in effect, a national observatory, but the Paris Observatory (established 1667) was the prototype of the national observatories that followed. Astronomers in Paris, along with those at Royal Greenwich Observatory (RGO, 1675), Berlin (1701), and St. Petersburg (1725), were dedicated to practical matters of national importance: improving navigation (especially the determination longitude at sea), geodesy, calendar reform, producing accurate stellar coordinates, and the determination of ephemerides of the Sun, Moon, and planets. The establishment of scientific academies such as the Accademia dei Lincei (Rome, 1603), the Royal Society (London, 1662), and the Académie des Sciences (Paris, 1666) testified to the importance and prestige of scientific work.

The Paris and Greenwich observatories stand out as institutional models upon which many subsequent observatories were based. Paris was a reflection of the splendor of the court of Louis XIV, and many significant astronomers were associated with it. Jean Dominique Cassini (1625-1712), his son, grandson, and great-grandson, all of whom were unofficial directors at Paris, comprised a most notable astronomy dynasty. The first Cassini discovered four moons of Saturn and the division of the ring system named after him. Paris astronomers used extremely long focal length refractors (up to 136 feet), mounted on tall masts, to observe the planets and Moon. Ole Römer demonstrated the finite nature of the speed of light from observations of Jupiter's Galilean moons. Paris astronomers carried out the first geodetic stuveys, covering the full arc of meridian of France by 1700. They later sent expeditions to Peru and Lappland. After Nicolas de Lacaille went to South Africa in 1751 to measure the positions of bright stars and to do further geodetic work, it was proven that the Earth's figure was oblate.

From the outset both Paris and Greenwich were mandated to aid navigation through the production of accurate star catalogs, ephemerides of the Sun, Moon, and planets, and the production of nautical almanacs. The French Connaissance de Temps first appeared in 1679. In 1795 its production became the responsibility of the newly created Bureau des Longitudes, which supervised the work of the Paris Observatory. In England the Board of Longitude supervised the work of the RGO from 1714 to 1828. By then, with the existence of accurate star positions, ephemerides, and the invention of the marine chronometer, the problem of determining one's geographical position at sea was essentially solved.

The buildings, staff size, and funding level of the RGO were, until the twentieth century, modest compared to Paris. The Astronomers Royal Flamsteed, Halley, Bradley, and especially George Biddell Airy (1801-1892) were amongst the most important astronomers of their day. Airy organized the observatory as an astronomical factory with himself as factory director and sought to carry out the observatory's mission (data acquisition, reduction, and publication of results) as accurately and efficiently as possible. Today's service observing and remote observing operations are direct descendants of such efforts.

Second era: 1820-1918

The second era of national observatory building was characterized by offshoots from previous national observatories (Royal Observatory Cape, South Africa, 1820), by newer observatories of younger nations (United States Naval Observatory, 1839), and the rise of astrophysical observatories (Potsdam, Prussia, 1874). Other national observatories of the second era include Pulkovo (Russia, 1839), the Chilean National Observatory (1852), the Argentine National Observatory (1870), the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (USA, 1891), and Canada's Dominion Observatory (1903) and Dominion Astrophysical Observatory (1918).

Of nineteenth century observatories, Pulkovo deserves special mention. Just as Tycho was given carte blanche by his sovereign to build the finest observatory in the world, so too was Wilhelm Struve (1793-1864) amply funded by Tsar Nicholas I. Struve ordered an Ertel transit instrument (for the determination of absolute right ascensions), an Ertel vertical circle (for the determination of absolute declinations), a Repsold meridian circle (for the determination of differential stellar coordinates) and prime vertical transit (for the determination of aberration and nutation), a Merz & Mahler heliometer (for the determination of angular sizes or angular separations), and the 15-inch Merz & Mahler refractor (for the discovery and measurement of double stars). This refractor was the largest telescope in the world at that time. A twin was built for Harvard College Observatory in 1847.

The instruments listed above testify to the maturation of positional astronomy as a field of endeavor. Not only did Pulkovo astronomers measure some of the first stellar parallaxes and discover many double stars, they also produced the most accurate values for the constants of precession, aberration, and nutation - values not superceded until 1964.

It is also important to mention that progress in astronomy depended very greatly on progress in instrument making and optics. Thomas Tompion, George Graham, John Bird, Jesse Ramsden, Joseph Fraunhofer, Edward Troughton, Carl Zeiss, Alvan Clark, Alvan Graham Clark, Howard Grubb, and George Ritchey are some of the men who made significant contributions during this era.

Third era: 1956-present

The present era of national observatory building is characterized by national or international consortia, large budgets, and the investigation of celestial objects at all electromagnetic wavelengths. From ground-based observatories we may investigate optical, infrared, radio, and submillimeter waves. Because of absorption by water vapor in the Earth's atmosphere of certain infrared and submillimeter waves, we must make some observations from balloons and aircraft. Ultraviolet, X-ray, and gamma-ray astronomy must be carried out from satellites.

Significant national observatories of the third era include the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (USA, 1956), Kitt Peak National Observatory (USA, 1957), NRAO (Australia, 1959), Cerro-Tololo Inter-American Observatory (Chile, 1963), European Southern Observatory (Chile, 1964), Anglo-Australian Observatory (1967), the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (USA, 1975-1995), and the Space Telescope Science Institute (1981).

Private observatories

Not all significant astronomical work is carried out at observatories funded by federal governments, universities, and research foundations. In the late eighteenth century and throughout the nineteenth century various (usually wealthy) individuals established their own private observatories.

The most accomplished private astronomer of all time was the German-English astronomer William Herschel (1738-1822). He pioneered the production of larger and larger reflecting telescopes (up to 48 inches in diameter), whose light gathering power enabled him to establish the field of galactic astronomy. He carried out deeper and deeper surveys of the northern sky, discovered hundreds of binary stars and many hundreds of nebulae. His "star gauges" showed that our solar system is situated in a large flattened disk of stars. From proper motion data he showed that our solar system is moving toward the constellation Hercules. He proved that gravity works in the stellar realms by demonstrating that members of a binary star pair can be observed to revolve about their center of mass. He laid the groundwork for studies of the evolution of stars and stellar systems.

After Herschel's discovery of the planet Uranus in 1781 he was able to give up his first profession (music) and moved to Slough (near Windsor), where his only occasional duty was to give private star parties for members of Royalty. Herschel's son John followed in his father's footsteps and took an 18-inch, 20 foot focal length, reflector to South Africa in the 1830's, where he conducted a southern sky survey, all done by eye and telescope, of course. The nebulae discovered by the Herschels formed the basis of Dreyer's New General Catalogue (1888).

Following Herschel's discovery of Uranus, the German astronomer Johann Hieronymus Schröter (1745-1816) quit his post in Hanover and moved to the small town of Lilienthal to devote himself to observational astronomy. He built what was then the largest observatory on the European continent, and was assisted by Karl Ludwig Harding (who discovered the third asteroid Juno in 1804) and Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel. Schröter was also closely associated with H. W. M. Olbers. Schröter made detailed drawings of features on the lunar surface and believed he detected changes in the structure of some of those features. He inspired many observers to dedicate themselves to planetary studies.

William Parsons, the Third Earl of Rosse (1800-1867) built a six foot diameter reflecting telescope in Parsonstown, Ireland, which revealed the spiral nature of some nebulae (i.e. galaxies).

William Huggins (1824-1910) and his wife Margaret Lindsay Murray established a private observatory at Tulse Hill, near London, where they observed the spectra of stars and other celestial objects. They proved that some nebulae are star clusters, and were the first to prove that others are composed entirely of glowing gas.

In 1868, simultaneously with the Frenchman Jules Janssen, the English amateur Norman Lockyer (1836-1920) used a spectroscope attached to a refractor to observe solar prominences outside of a total solar eclipse. He was subsequently appointed head of the Solar Physics Observatory at South Kensington. When he retired in 1911 he established his own observatory at Salcombe Regis.

The American Henry Draper (1837-1882) was a pioneer of astrophotography. His widow funded significant spectroscopic research carried out by astronomers at the Harvard College Observatory.

George Ellery Hale (1868-1938), the son of a wealthy Chicago industrialist, invented the spectroheliograph while an undergraduate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He established a private solar observatory in his parents' backyard in Kenwood, then a suburb of Chicago. This later became part of the University of Chicago. Hale became the greatest observatory entrepreneur of all time, establishing the Yerkes Observatory (1897) and the Mt. Wilson Observatory (1904). He was the driving force behind the establishment of Palomar Observatory (1948).

At the end of the twentieth century, due to advances in electronics and imaging devices, many amateurs obtain significant hard data for professional research projects. Photoelectric and CCD photometry by amateurs has been very important for variable star research and has even led to the discovery of a new class of pulsating stars. Astrometry from CCD imagery routinely provides data on recently discovered asteroids, which allows the calculation of their orbits. Until very recently the most successful discoverer of supernovae in other galaxies was the Australian amateur Robert Evans.

Mountaintop observatories and the modern era

As a result of his optical researches, Isaac Newton realized that the Earth's atmosphere acts as a lens of sorts and that one could achieve much better astronomical image clarity by siting one's telescope on "some lofty mountain".

In 1741 the French astronomer Franois de Plantade carried out the first mountaintop astronomical observations at Sencours Pass, at the foot of Pic du Midi in the French Pyrenees, at an altitude of 2300 meters. Unfortunately, he succumbed to altitude sickness and died.

The next small step leading to improved observing was taken with the establishment in 1783 of the Dunsink Observatory, an institute of Trinity College, Dublin. The observatory was intentionally sited outside the city (8 km). Also, it had the first fully functional rotating hemispherical dome, and the primary telescope was mounted on a pier which was structurally (and therefore vibrationally) isolated from the walls of the building.

In 1856 the Scottish astronomer Charles Piazzi Smyth spent nearly four months at Tenerife in the Canary Islands and demonstrated that mountaintop observing was both desirable (for image clarity) and viable (for humans).

The first mountaintop observatory intended to be permanent was Lick Observatory, which was completed in 1888. Situated at the 1280 m summit of Mt. Hamilton, near San Jose, California, it boasted a 36-inch refractor by Alvan Clark, then the world's largest. After the spectacular success of the Mt. Wilson Observatory and the Palomar Observatory, it became clear that the best seeing was obtained at mountaintop sites within 50 miles of the ocean. Because of the proximity of the ocean, one gets a smooth, laminar flow of air over the coastal mountains when the prevailing wind conditions are in effect. This has been borne out by the establishment of many other observatories during the second half of the twentieth century.

The highest major observatory in the world (at 4205 m) is at Mauna Kea on the island of Hawaii. From a very modest start in 1964, Mauna Kea's astronomical installations expanded greatly and now include the University of Hawaii 2.2-m telescope, the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope (3.6-m), the NASA Infrared Telescope Facility (3.0-m), the United Kingdom Infrared Telescope (3.8-m), the James Clerk Maxwell submillimeter telescope (15-m), the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory (10.4-m), one of the nine elements of the Very Long Baseline Array (25-m radio telescope), the two Keck telescopes (each 10-m), the Japanese optical and infrared telescope Subaru (8.3-m), the northern Gemini telescope (8.1- m), and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory Submillimeter Array.

Presently, the highest established telescopes are the twin 0.7-m reflectors of the Meyer-Womble Observatory at Mt. Evans, Colorado (elevation 4313 m). A still higher observatory is being built at 5000 m about 40 km east of San Pedro de Atacama in Chile. This is the centimeter -wavelength Cosmic Background Imager, which will investigate the small ripples in the 3 K background radiation leftover from the Big Bang. This observatory will have an oxygen-enhanced environment for the operators.

At the time of the publication of this article there will be more than 90 optical or infrared telescopes in operation around the world with diameters of 1.5 meters or larger (see figure). This includes the now single-mirror 6.5-m MMT at Mt. Hopkins, Arizona, the twin 6.5-m reflectors of the Magellan Project (situated at Las Campanas, Chile), the twin 8.1-m Gemini telescopes (one at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, the other at Cerro Pachon, Chile), the four 8.2-m elements of the European Southern Observatory's Very Large Telescope (at Cerro Paranal, Chile), Japan's 8.3-m Subaru Telescope (at Mauna Kea), the two 8.4-m elements of the Large Binocular Telescope (at Mt. Graham, Arizona), the two 10-m Keck telescopes at Mauna Kea, and the 11-m Hobby-Eberly spectroscopic telescope at Mt. Locke, Texas. In fact, by the turn of the 21st century more than half the area of telescopes larger than 1.0 meters will be in telescopes larger than 8 meters.

Given the expense of such facilities (measured in units of hundreds of millions of dollars), one might naturally ask why so many large telescopes are being built. It is a reflection of the blossoming of extragalactic observational astronomy, the desire to give hard data to cosmologists for testing their models, and the desire to discover and study intrinsically faint objects such as asteroids in the outer solar system, brown dwarf stars, and extrasolar planets.

The design and construction of these state-of-the-art telescopes has required the development of computer- controlled mirror mounts, better ventilated domes (to eliminate as much as possible the degradation of the seeing due to air in the dome), thin mirrors (as in the case of most of the telescopes mentioned above) or multi-mirror systems (36 hexagonal segments in the case of each of the Keck telescopes, 91 segments in the case of the Hobby-Eberly Telescope). Modern instrumentation often uses techniques borrowed from spy satellites to achieve diffraction-limited performance. Whereas photographic plates a century ago had a quantum efficiency (QE) of less than one percent and photomultiplier tubes typically had peak QE's of a few percent, modern instrumentation can achieve QE's of 70 percent. Such instruments, fed by the large objectives of the present generation of telescopes, are producing many spectacular results. Furthermore, modern computing capabilities are allowing digital celestial surveys which would have been technically impossible only a few years ago.

0mm

Dick S J 1990 Pulkovo Observatory and the national observatory movement: an historical overview In: Lieske, J H, Abalakin, V K (eds.) Inertial coordinate system on the sky (Dordrecht, Boston, and London: Kluwer), 29-38

Howse D 1986 The Greenwich list of observatories: a world list of astronomical observatories, instruments and clocks, 1670-1850 Journal for the History of Astronomy 17 i-iv, 1-100 (Amendment list no. 1 25 207-218 (1994))

Krisciunas K 1988 Astronomical Centers of the World (Cambridge: CUP)

Müller P 1992 Sternwarten in Bildern: Architektur und Geschichte der Sternwarten von den Anfängen bis ca. 1950 (Berlin: Springer Verlag)

Needham J and Ling W 1959, Science and civilisation in China. Volume 3: Mathematics and the sciences of the heavens and the Earth (Cambridge: CUP), pp. 171-461

Sayili A 1981 The Observatory in Islam (New York: Arno Press)

Thoren V E 1990 The Lord of Uraniborg: a biography of Tycho Brahe (Cambridge: CUP)

Supplementary references:

Deane, Thatcher E. 1989, The Chinese Imperial Astronomical Bureau: Form and Function of the Ming Dynasty Qintianjian from 1365 to 1627, Univ. Washington Dissertation

Dreyer, J. L. E. 1890, Tycho Brahe: a picture of scientific life and work in the sixteenth century, Edinburgh: Adam and Charles Black (reprinted 1977 by Peter Smith, Gloucester, Mass.)

Hartner, W. 1950, "The astronomical instruments of Cha-ma-lu-ting, their identification, and their relations to the instruments of the observatory of Marāgha", Isis 41, 184-194

Hermann, Dieter B. 1984, The History of Astronomy from Herschel to Hertzsprung, Cambridge Univ. Press

Ho Peng Yoke 1997, "Astronomy in China", in Encyclopedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures, Helaine Selin, ed. (Dordrecht: Kluwer), 108-111

Huang, Yi-Long 1997, "Chinese astronomy" in History of Astronomy: an encyclopedia, J. Lankford, ed. (New York and London: Garland), pp. 145-149

Kaye, G. R. 1973, The Astronomical Observatories of Jai Singh, Indological Book House, reprint of 1918 edition

Krisciunas, K. 1990, "Pulkovo Observatory's status in 19th century positional astronomy", in Inertial Coordinate System on the Sky, J. H. Lieske & V. K. Abalakin, eds. (Dordrecht: Kluwer), pp. 15-24

Krisciunas, K. 1992, "The legacy of Ulugh Beg", in Central Asian Monuments, Hasan B. Paksoy, ed. (Istanbul: Isis Press), pp. 95-103

Krisciunas, K. 1993, "A more complete analysis of the errors in Ulugh Beg's star catalogue", J. Hist. Astron. 24, 269-280

Pedersen, O. 1976, "Some early European observatories", Vistas in Astronomy 20, 17-28

Sivin, N. 1973, "Copernicus in China", in Colloquia Copernicana, II (Wroclaw: Polskiej Akademii Nauk), pp. 63-114

KEVIN KRISCIUNAS

Figure captions

Fig. 1 - Pulkovo Observatory, originally completed in 1839, was completely destroyed during World War II. It was rebuilt by 1954. This is the main building as it appeared in 1989. (Photo by Kevin Krisciunas)

Fig. 2 - Lick Observatory, ca. 1936. The large white dome houses the 36-inch refractor, still the second largest in the world.

Fig. 3 - Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory illuminated by moonlight. The largest dome houses the 4-m reflector. (Photo by Kevin Krisciunas)

Fig. 4- The number of optical and infrared telescopes with primary objectives larger than a given size, ca. 2001. We include all telescopes with diameter D greater than or equal to 1.5 meters. We count the two 8.4-m diameter elements of the Large Binocular Telescope, the four 8.2-m diameter elements of the Very Large Telescope, and the two 6.5-m telescopes of the Magellan Project as separate instruments. Each of the 10-m Keck Telescopes contains 36 hexagonal mirror segments, while the 11-m Hobby-Eberly Telescope has 91 hexagonal segments. (Diagram by Kevin Krisciunas)