The disinformation problem for black holes

According to reports, the information paradox for black holes has been vexing the most brilliant minds in physics for 30 years, but has recently been resolved by Stephen Hawking using quantum gravity [\cite=GR17]. Actually, the paradox can be resolved much more simply. Logically there are no true paradoxes, just misunderstandings, usually simple but fundamental.

No escape?

The classical idea of a black hole is a region where the gravitational field is so strong that nothing can escape, not even light. This is a prediction of Einstein's theory of gravity, General Relativity (GR), and nowadays astronomers regularly report observations of black holes, such as the supermassive black hole at the centre of our galaxy.

The textbook definition of a black hole is by an event horizon [\cite=txt], which is the boundary between regions where a particle can or cannot escape to infinity, an abstract mathematical notion. Consequently its location at any given time is determined by the entire future history of the universe. For instance, an event horizon could be passing through you right now due to events in the future, and you would feel nothing. This overly abstract definition appears to be the main conceptual obstacle causing the supposed paradox; if a black hole is defined as a region of no escape, then, well, information cannot escape.

Hawking was perhaps the main proponent of event horizons, but has recently stated that "a true event horizon never forms, just an apparent horizon" [\cite=GR17]. However, Hawking's definition of apparent horizon [\cite=txt] is also not practical for defining black holes, due to its indirect nature and dependence on how one regards space-time as sliced into space and time. Einstein's original insight in his earlier theory of Special Relativity was that space and time are relative, but can be combined as space-time.

Gravity traps

Imagine a roughly spherical surface, on which a flash of light is detonated simultaneously at each point. This produces an outgoing wavefront of increasing area, with diverging light rays, and an ingoing wavefront of decreasing area, with converging light rays. Now imagine that the surface encloses a massive source such as a star. Since gravity is attractive, it pulls back the outgoing light rays so that they diverge less than otherwise. For a massive enough source and a small enough surface, even the outgoing light rays could be converging. This is a trapped surface [\cite=P].

Separating the trapped surfaces from the untrapped surfaces, one expects a marginal surface, where the outgoing light rays are instantaneously parallel. The marginal surface locates the black hole at a given time, and as time proceeds, the marginal surfaces form a trapping horizon [\cite=bhd]. Additionally, the ingoing light rays are converging; if they were diverging, it would define a white hole. Lastly, there are trapped surfaces just inside the horizon, and untrapped surfaces just outside; if it were the other way around, one would have an inner rather than outer horizon.

These local conditions suffice as a practical definition of a black hole. Assuming the Einstein equations with matter of positive energy density, it is straightforward to prove several results [\cite=bhd] which were generally believed or conjectured properties of black holes. In particular, the horizon is one-way traversable, so that one can fall into a black hole but not escape; in GR terminology, the horizon is space-like or null. Also, the horizon area cannot decrease, either increasing if something is falling into it, or remaining constant. Thus a black hole generally grows.

Using such ideas, a new paradigm for dynamical black holes is being developed, as a more practical alternative to the textbook paradigm describing stationary black holes and event horizons. An important recent result [\cite=en] is a law of energy conservation, derived from the Einstein equations, which expresses the increase in mass of a black hole in terms of the energy densities of the infalling matter and gravitational radiation.

Not so black

About 30 years ago, Hawking discovered an unexpected result in Quantum Field Theory (QFT), which is the framework which describes all known matter in the universe, and so all fundamental physics except for gravity. He found that a stationary black hole will radiate with a thermal spectrum at a certain temperature, like a black body in ordinary thermodynamics. This happens because the quantum vacuum is continually bubbling, creating and annihilating pairs of virtual particles. Near the horizon of the black hole, a negative-energy particle may fall into the black hole, while a positive-energy particle escapes to infinity. The black hole has thereby lost mass and, since its mass and area are related, consequently contracts. Left by itself, it will slowly shrink and, since the rate increases with decreasing size, presumably evaporates completely. The endpoint of evaporation is not agreed, as one would need a theory of quantum gravity, where there are many competing notions but little consensus.

Losing it?

So what is the supposed paradox? Firstly, it is known theoretically that a stationary black hole has just two parameters, mass and angular momentum. This is all that can be known about the black hole from outside, however it was formed, so almost all the information about the matter which formed it has been lost to the outside universe. This is not what concerned most people, since a proper accounting of information would include what was inside the black hole. However, now imagine that the black hole evaporates. The matter and energy inside it gradually come out again as Hawking radiation, which has just one parameter, the Hawking temperature. So it might seem that almost all the information about the matter which originally created the black hole has been lost. That would contradict unitarity, a principle of QFT which preserves information and, Hawking long argued, would therefore have to be abandoned.

The great escape

Apart from the final stage of evaporation, the process can be described in a semi-classical approximation, where the radiation is quantized but gravity is treated classically by standard GR. QFT is supposed to determine the energy densities of the radiation, which provide the source for the Einstein equations, determining the space-time geometry. Actually all we need here is the fact that the ingoing Hawking radiation has negative energy density. Then according to the Einstein equations, the usual rules for trapping horizons switch: the horizon shrinks in area and becomes two-way traversable; in GR terminology, the horizon is time-like. Matter and radiation will escape, carrying information.

Hawking's thermal spectrum applies only for a stationary black hole, ignoring the back-reaction of the radiation on the black hole. Such a black hole is not evaporating. If one includes the back-reaction as above, then the black hole evaporates, but there is no reason to expect a purely thermal spectrum.

In seeking details, one runs into ambiguities in QFT, let alone the choice of theory of quantum gravity. Hawking favours Euclidean quantum gravity and now claims that information is preserved [\cite=GR17]. However, in terms of trapping horizons, there never was a paradox; when a black hole is being formed by gravitational collapse of normal matter, the horizon is one-way traversable, while if it is evaporating, the horizon becomes two-way traversable. Energy and information will escape then.

One aspect which is not necessarily clear from a semi-classical analysis is the endpoint of black-hole evaporation, since there is usually a singularity lurking inside the black hole, where space-time curvature becomes infinite. However, few people believe in the physical reality of the singularity, since it is a prediction of GR beyond its domain of validity. Many experts seem to believe that some theory of quantum gravity will resolve the singularity somehow.

Suppose then that the centre of the black hole never becomes singular. A regular centre is untrapped, so there must be an inner trapping horizon of small (presumably near-Planck) area. According to the Einstein equations, the rules for inner rather than outer trapping horizons again switch: under positive energy density, it is shrinking and two-way traversable, while under negative energy density, it is growing and one-way traversable; in that case, collapsed matter can only exit the black hole through it. As the black hole evaporates, the shrinking outer horizon races in towards the growing inner horizon until the two meet, marking the endpoint of evaporation. It seems likely that the outer and inner horizons form a single smooth trapping horizon enclosing a compact space-time region of trapped surfaces.

On causal grounds, everything which fell into the black hole must eventually re-emerge. This is a very general scenario, using only classical GR with minimal input from quantum gravity, independent of details of particular theories. There is no singularity, no event horizon and no information paradox.

Orthodox paradox

In the author's understanding, there never was an information paradox or problem for black holes, but rather a disinformation problem, that the textbook GR definition of a black hole is by an event horizon. Understood in terms of trapping horizons, the supposed paradox disappears.