Sliding Dynamics of the Wigner Crystal on Liquid He

INTRODUCTION

Surface state electrons on liquid He form the Wigner crystal at low temperatures, accompanying with periodic surface deformation, referred to as dimples. The Wigner crystal with the dimples has been discussed in terms of the coupled plasmon-ripplon (CPR) model, [\cite=CPR] and its first observation has been carried out by the measurement of the CPR resonance. [\cite=CPRR] The dynamics of the Wigner crystal is governed by the motion and the deformation of the dimples, because each of the electrons composing the Wigner crystal is located in a potential caused by each of the dimples.

Recent studies of AC Corbino conductivity σxx of the Wigner crystal reveals an abrupt jump of σxx at a certain driving voltage and at a moderate magnetic field. [\cite=PRL] [\cite=JLTP] This conductivity jump is attributed to the collective sliding of the electrons out of the potential. In the σxx measurement, a sinusoidal voltage is applied to the inner Corbino electrode coupled to the surface electrons capacitively, and the resulting current is measured via the outer electrode with a lock-in amplifier. The signal averaging makes the detailed investigation of the sliding dynamics difficult.

A transport study using a voltage pulse, on the other hand, makes real-time observation of the sliding achievable. The measurement with a trapezoidal pulse [\cite=LT] elucidates that the dynamics of the Wigner crystal is subjected by the ramp rate of the input voltage, v = dV / dt. This is understood in terms of the sliding model. [\cite=PRL] [\cite=JLTP] In the present conditions, σxx is so large that the current inside of the Wigner crystal is dominated by the impedance of the capacitance between the surface electrons and the Corbino electrode; hence, the current density j at the electrode gap is proportional to dV / dt. Since the external driving force to each of electrons is given by eσxx- 1j, the driving force is proportional to dV / dt. Although this model does not take into account the current inhomogeneity inside the surface electron, it gives a basis for understanding the nonlinear dynamics of the Wigner crystal.

In the trapezoidal pulse study, dV / dt change discontinuously at the edges of the pulse. This means that the Wigner crystal receives an impulsive force at the pulse edges. It is therefore inappropriate to employ the trapezoidal pulse to inspect sliding mechanism in detail. The continuous sweep of the driving force is obviously needed to investigate the dynamics of the transition from the dimpled state to the sliding one and vice versa.

In the present work, we have developed a novel experimental method using a so-called "t2 pulse", in which the leading and trailing edges of the applied voltage pulse are proportional to the square of time, [formula]. Employing the t2 pulse, the ramp rate changes as [formula], resulting in the continuous sweep of the driving force. Consequently, it is expected that the sliding transition is induced in sweeping the driving force, leading to real-time observation of the sliding dynamics. In this paper, we report the observation of the sliding transition brought about by the t2 pulse. We have revealed that the sliding transition is governed by only the ramp rate.

EXPERIMENTAL

As well as the previous works, [\cite=PRL] [\cite=JLTP] we have employed the capacitive coupling method with a Corbino electrode. A voltage pulse is applied to the inner electrode, and the response current in the radial direction is measured as an induced voltage at the outer electrode against the ground. The typical waveform of the applied t2 pulse is shown in the inset of Fig. 1(a). The input voltage is ramped up to a height V0 with a rise time t0, where the voltage V increases in proportion to the square of time; [formula]. After the t2 ramp up, the voltage was kept at V0 for 100 μs, and then ramped down to zero with [formula] in a duration t0. This pulse is applied at every 200 μs. The response is acquired by a digital storage oscilloscope and is averaged 10000 times.

The electrons are generated at 1.4 K by thermionic emission of a tungsten filament. The present electron density is 1.52  ×  108 cm- 2. The measurement is carried out at 60 mK, much lower temperature than the melting point of the present Wigner crystal, 250 mK. A static magnetic field B up to 700 G was applied perpendicular to the surface of the liquid He.

In order to compare the t2-pulse results, we have made the σxx measurement using a 100 kHz sinusoidal wave and have measured the responses for the trapezoidal voltage pulses.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1(a) shows the first half of the input t2 pulse Vin (V0 = 700 mV and t0 = 20 μs) and the response Vout for B = 0 G and 690 G. At 0 G, the response follows the input pulse with a very short delay below 1 μs. At 690 G, on the other hand, the response shows remarkably long delay at t > tc  ~  5.7 μs. This delay becomes more prominent by taking the time derivative of the response, dV / dt, as shown in Fig. 1(b). At 0 G, dV / dt increases linearly, indicating that the response trails the input waveform. At 690 G, in contrast, the response shows an anomaly, that is, dV / dt deviates from the linear tendency with a large delay at t > tc.

Our previous studies on the nonlinear transport of the Wigner crystal employing both continuous waves (CW) [\cite=PRL] [\cite=JLTP] and trapezoidal pulses [\cite=LT] illustrate that the sliding transition is brought about when the ramp rate of the applied voltage exceeds a certain critical rate. In the trapezoidal-pulsed study, moreover, the sliding is observed as a sudden increase of the response delay. Therefore, the present behavior of the t2-response waveform at t > tc means the sliding transition of the Wigner crystal induced by the t2 pulse. Based upon the data shown in Fig. 1, we determine the critical ramp rate [formula] V s- 1.

We have made the above measurements for various t0's. In Fig. 2, vc is shown as a function of t0 for a fixed V0 = 700 mV. The critical ramp rate obtained from the trapezoidal pulse measurement is also shown as a broken line. In the t2-pulsed method, vc is irrespective of t0, although it ranges from 2.0 to 2.5  ×  104 V s- 1. This indicates that the sliding transition is not subjected by the rise time, but by the ramp rate of the input pulse. Moreover, vc is fairly close to the one obtained in the trapezoidal pulse measurement, 1.9  ×  104 V s- 1. This agreement convinces that the sliding state caused by the t2 pulse is the same state as the one induced by the trapezoidal pulse.

We have found that vc obtained from the t2 pulse is always slightly larger than that in the trapezoidal method. This may be substantial, because the sliding transition can be dominated not only by the voltage ramp rate but also by the history in the applied voltage. In short, the impulsive force produced at the edges of the trapezoidal pulse may activate the sliding. This proposition must be clarified by the detailed analysis of the response waveform below and above vc, and it will be discussed elsewhere.

Figure 3 shows the magnetic field dependence of vc for various pulse conditions, together with the vc data obtained from the σxx jumps in the 100 kHz continuous wave measurement. All the vc data collapse onto a single line in the log-log plot, showing the powerlaw behavior: [formula]. This behavior is consistent with the result in our previous work, where the powerlaw is explained by the transition from the CPR state to a non-CPR state. [\cite=PRL] [\cite=JLTP] As regards the t2-pulsed studies, vc is in good agreement with the one obtained from the σxx jump. Again this fact shows that the present transition brought about by the t2 pulse is the same phenomenon caused by the continuous wave. In the t2-pulsed studies, vc is not obtained below 300 G, because the delay of the response has not been observed. The reason has not yet been clarified. We suppose that the disappearance is not intrinsic property of the pulsed method, because the sliding transition has been verified in the trapezoidal pulse response down to 200 G. [\cite=LT] Employing the t2 pulses with different V0 and/or t0 may make the observation of the sliding transition at the lower magnetic field possible.

CONCLUSION

In order to inspect the sliding dynamics of the Wigner crystal in real-time, the pulsed method employing a t2 pulse has been developed, where the exerting force upon the Wigner crystal is swept continuously. The sliding transition of the crystal is induced by the t2 pulse as well as by a trapezoidal one. The sliding is determined by the ramp rate of the input pulse. As regards B dependence of vc, the powerlaw behavior is observed, which is in good agreement with our previous results and the sliding model.

As compared to the previous works, the present study has the advantage of the continuous sweep of the driving force to the Wigner crystal. The continuous sweep gives prominence to the transition from the dimpled to the sliding state. The quantitative analysis of the response waveform below and above vc will clarify the sliding dynamics of the Wigner crystal.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, and by Yamada Science Foundation.