QPOs from Radial and Vertical Oscillation of Shocks in Advective Accretion Flows

To be Published in the proceedings of the 10th Marcel Grossman Meeting (World Scientific Co., Singapore), Ed. R. Ruffini et al.

Introduction

It has become abundantly clear that Centrifugal pressure dominated BOundary Layers or so-called CENBOLs, which are formed in between the black hole horizon and the accretion shock are the most important ingredients in black hole astrophysics (Chakrabarti, this volume). Chakrabarti and Titarchuk (1995) showed that this is nothing but the elusive Compton cloud which reprocesses the incoming photons from a Keplerian disk and re-emits as high energy X-rays. However, CENBOLs could be oscillating due to cooling processes (Molteni, Sponholz and Chakrabarti, 1996; Charabarti, Acharyya & Molteni, 2004) or because of the topologies which do not permit standing shocks (Ryu, Molteni and Chakrabarti, 1997). The emissions from these oscillating CENBOLs naturally explains the quasi-periodic oscillations observed in black hole candidates. There are several artificial models of these QPOs in the literature, but ours are the solutions of the most realistic governing equations till date. Furthermore, since our solutions show genericness of the physics of oscillations, we predict that QPOs should be observed even when the black hole is super-massive. For details regarding this and other simulations readers are referred to Chakrabarti, Acharyya and Molteni (2004).

Results and Interpretations

Numerical simulations have been carried out using the Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH). Both the upper and the lower halves of the equatorial planes have been used for injection of matter. The high Comptonization cooling by the disk with a lower accretion rate is modeled by a power-law cooling from a flow of high accretion rate. This clever but appropriate simplification allowed us to resolve the mystery of QPOs in a most decisive manner.

Figures 1(a-d) show four light curves (luminosity vs. time) obtained by numerical simulations of low angular flows around black holes. The accretion rates (assuming the cooling to be due to Comptonization) were [formula] and 0.85 respectively. As the accretion rates go up, the Compton y parameter becomes high (0.4, 0.5 and 11.8) and 43.4. The cooling caused a drop in the post-shock pressure and the average location of the shock moved to Xs  =  15.8, 16.3, 24 and 5 respectively. After an initial transient state, the light curves showed typical fluctuations as seen in χ state (Belloni et al. 2000) in GRS 1915+105. However, amplitude of fluctuation dropped when the [formula] is close to 1.

Figures 2(a-d) show the Power Density Spectrum of these light curves. We note that for low accretion rates, the quasi-periodic oscillation is very sharp (marked with arrows), and is located at the break frequency νb. At the break frequency, the slope of the PDS abruptly changes as in a observed data. The break frequency separates two types of flows: The flat power-law at lower frequency (ν  <  νb) is generated by the super-sonic pre-shock flow and the other part (for ν  >  νb) is generated by the subsonic CENBOL region located just outside the horizon. At high density, we observed two QPO frequencies: one at 8.32HZ and the other at 3.58Hz respectively. The QPO frequencies depend on the angular momentum and they basically scale inversely with the mass of the black hole.

Concluding Remarks

We showed that though black holes have no hard surfaces, the centrifugal barrier in the flow can behave like one. The consequent CENBOL undergoes radial and vertical oscillations. The X-rays emitted also undergo similar oscillations. The light curve and PDS both have striking similarities with the observed light curve and PDS. We do not find any other model in the literature which explains QPO so naturally. In GRS 1915+105, the behaviour is more complex that what is presented here. We believe that interaction of the CENBOL, the base of the jet and the photons from the Keplerian disk will be important and small variations in accretion rates of the Keplerian and sub-Keplerian flows will cause observed changes in light curve (Chakrabarti and Nandi, 2000). This is currently being investigated.

Acknowledgments

SKC acknowledges a RESPOND project from Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO).