Class Transitions in Black Holes

Introduction

Black holes are fundamentally 'black' in that they cannot be observed directly. However, the behaviour of radiation emitted by the matter falling onto them can be studied through carefully planned observations and a wealth of information about the black hole and the accretion flow could be obtained. In the present review, we concentrate on the characteristics of class transitions in black holes and infer possible physical processes which may be responsible for such transitions.

Nature of emitted radiation: theoretical expectations

Radiations emitted from the infalling matter carry information about the density, temperature and magnetic field distribution. Theoretically, these flow variables are derived in conjunction with the velocity profiles (subsonic/supersonic nature) when proper hydro- and magnetohydro- dynamic treatments are made. By 'proper', we mean by actually solving full set of equations with appropriate boundary conditions and not making 'models'. The general picture which comes out has been discussed in several papers and we refer to the reviews Chakrabarti (1996, 2001) in this connection.

In order to re-iterate the importance of the role of transonic solutions in understanding black hole accretion process and therefore the spectral variations including the variability class transitions, we present in Fig. 1(a-b) two types of basic solutions of the viscous transonic flows (see, Chakrabarti, 1990, 1996 for details). In Fig. 1a, (upper panel) a solution with a small viscosity parameter is presented which includes a standing shock transition shown by a vertical arrow. In the left, the Mach number variation is presented and in the right, the flow configuration is presented. In the outer regions, when the flow is sub-sonic, it is more or less Keplerian (K). After the flow becomes super-sonic, the flow becomes sub-Keplerian (SK). It passes through a centrifugal force induced standing or oscillating shock and become subsonic again which enters through the inner sonic point to become super-sonic. This region between the shock and the horizon is known as the CENtrifugal pressure dominated BOundary Layer or CENBOL which essentially releases most of the observable X-rays in a galactic black hole accretion. When the viscosity is higher (Fig. 1b), the solution changes its character: there are now two solutions, one directly coming from a Keplerian disk and entering through the inner sonic point (lower branch), while the other passes through the outer sonic point before disappearing into a black hole. The configuration profiles show the essential differences. It is natural that both of these steady solutions cannot be realized simultaneously. Time dependent simulations always prefer the higher entropy solution passing through the inner sonic point. Thus while at lower viscosities, the flow forms a steady or oscillating shock, at higher viscosities the flow indeed forms a shock by staying on the upper branch, but the shock propagates away to a larger distance (Chakrabarti & Molteni, 1995) while converting the post-shock region into a Keplerian disk on its way. Thus, it ends up in the lower branch. This is how a Keplerian disk forms in the first place. Fig. 2(a-b) shows this behaviour where evolution of the Mach number and the specific angular momentum are shown.

Thus we observe that both the Keplerian and the sub-Keplerian flow could be present depending on viscosity parameter and on the basis of these theoretical considerations, Chakrabarti (1994) and Chakrabarti & Titarchuk (1995) proposed that perhaps both the components are present in a generic flow around galactic and extragalactic black holes with the Keplerian disk in the equatorial plane flanked by sub-Keplerian flows above and below. Subsequently, it was found that the CENBOL could be the source of the jets as well (Chakrabarti, 1998, 1999) and the ratio of the outflow rate to the inflow rate [formula] strongly depends on the strength of the shock, characterized by the compression ratio R. In both the weak (R  ~  0) and the strong (R  ~  4 - 7) shocks, the ratio is low, while for the intermediate shocks of strength (~  2 - 3) the ratio is very high. A high Rjet, coupled to a high [formula] produces profuse amount of outflows which can influence the spectral properties in the following way: (a) the outflow, up to the sonic sphere, moves slowly and has higher optical depth. It intercepts the soft-photons from the disk and reprocesses them. If the optical depth is high enough, it can be cooled efficiently and the flow might just loss its drive to go out and fall back into the disk itself, temporary increasing the accretion rates. Eventually, after this temporarily phase is over after the viscous time scale of a few tens of seconds, the CENBOL develops once more and the outflow starts all over again. All these phases could be observable in the spectral feature and light curves which determine the 'class' of a black hole. (b) In case the accretion rate is not high enough, the outflow will not be cooled and would continue to propagate steadily. This type of 'class' may continue for a long time, unless the rates (Keplerian and sub-Keplerian) themselves are fundamentally changed at the outer edge in the first place. Change in viscosity brings rise to changes in the Keplerian/sub-Keplerian rates (see Fig. 2 above) as well.

According to this Two Component Advective Flow (TCAF) paradigm, oscillations of shocks give rise to the quasi-periodic oscillations (QPOs). Thus QPOs are possible when shocks are. But the reverse is not true, since not all the shocks are expected to oscillate (Molteni, Sponholz & Chakrabarti, 1996; Chakrabarti, Acharyya & Molteni, 2004). Shocks are also useful in accelerating particles and producing non-thermal spectra. Thus, high energy emissions may also be explained from by TCAF solution (Chakrabarti, 2004) The existence of two components in the flow has been verified observationally (Smith, Heindl & Swank, 2002).

In Fig. 3, we present a few types of configurations of the Two Component Advective Flows (TCAF) which give rise to different types of light curves. In the upper left, the sub-Keplerian component has no sharp shock transition, but the flow is puffed up due to slowing down of matter (and becoming hotter in the process) due to the centrifugal barrier. This is expected to produce a light curve with no QPO and with a low rate of outflow. The spectrum will be harder. In upper-right, we schematically show the CENBOL as a spherical region (which in reality is a 'thick disk' like region with funnel etc. (see, Chakrabarti, 1993) which is formed due to a steady or an oscillating shock. Thermally/centrifugally/magneto-centrifugally driven wind comes out of this region. This configuration is expected to produce harder spectrum with a QPO with possible drifting frequency due to variation in accretion rate and viscosity. Accretion rate controls the cooling rate and hence the shock (QPO) oscillation frequency. In the lower left, we show the situation when the outflow could become optically thick and return flow causes the jets to be blobby. Return flow temporarily increases the accretion rate and soft-state may develop. This may cause switching of states at the interval of a few seconds in some of the classes. In lower-right, the viscosity is so high that the Keplerian disk reaches close to the inner sonic point (Fig. 2b) and in this soft/quasi-soft state only hard spectra is produced by the bulk-motion Comptonization and non-thermal particles in accretion and wind shocks.

It is to be noted that in the TCAF solution, the advective flow itself is the Compton cloud. The literature is overwhelmed with the models such as ADAF, dynamical corona and the like which can at the best mimic the CENBOL of TCAF solution. A standing, propagating or oscillating shock close to a black hole, is not a wishful thinking, but it is a reality. The cartoon diagram may remind people of two-temperature flow of Shapiro, Lightman and Eardley (1976), but the difference is that presently one is not discussing 'Keplerian' advective flow as no such thing exists. Similarly, it may also remind one of thick accretion flow: this is also not correct, as the thick disk solutions are purely rotating and are not attached to any disk. The only self-consistent solutions which include thick disk like feature as well as the disk is the advective flow model presented more than ten years back (see, Chakrabarti, 1993).

In Fig. 4, we show schematically how the interactions among the disk, CENBOL and the jet components could give rise to time-dependent behaviour of the light curves (Chakrabarti et al. 2002a). Actual numerical simulation is difficult in presence of Comptonization, however using one type of cooling only, we have been able to show that the Power density spectrum of the χ state could be produced as observed (Chakrabarti, Acharyya & Molteni, 2004; see also Chakrabarti, this volume). Details of the results of this non-linear analysis will be discussed elsewhere.

Classification of light curves of GRS1915+105 and their transitions

One of the puzzling black holes is GRS 1915+105 which exhibits large variations in the light curves. Originally these were classified into twelve classes by Belloni et al. (2000) on the basis of the hardness ratio. Naik et al. (2002) showed that there is another independent class. In Chakrabarti & Nandi (2000) it was already pointed out that these classes are due to variations in the accretion rates. Chakrabarti et al. (2004a) reported some of the actual class transitions using observations with IXAE. They showed that these transitions are smooth and in between two 'known' classes the object stays in an 'unknown' classes. In Chakrabarti et al. (2004b), a few other class transitions are reported and it was further established that during a class transition, the photon count changes considerably and it is possible to understand this behaviour by assuming changes in the sub-Keplerian accretion rate.

To begin with we present the classes as presented by Belloni et al. (2000) in a sequence which is easier to understand using TCAF. Fig. 5 (Nandi et al. 2000) shows the twelve classes marked by 1 ... 12 which are called χ, α, ν, β, λ, κ, ρ, μ, θ, δ, γ and φ respectively. Panels 3 and 6 have more than one light curve (separated by dashed line), as they are similar but with subtle difference. Along X-axis is the time elapsed in seconds since the beginning of the observation. Spectral analysis of the 1st panel suggests that it is purely in hard state. There is a prominent QPO whose frequency may change from time to time and photon count number may also change significantly. Final three panels (10-12) contain light curves of those days on which spectral states are soft. There are no QPOs in these days. Spectral fits indicate high temperature and high photon spectral index. The ninth panel contains a light curve where two semi-soft spectra with different photon counts are seen. Count rate varies very significantly. In the remaining seven panels, (2-8) photons jump in between two distinct states, one with a low photon count (off state) and the other with a high photon count (on state).

In Fig. 6(a-c), we present a few examples of the class transition (Chakrabarti et al 2004b). We present the light curves (2 - 18keV) of June 22nd, 1997 observation in the upper panel and the mean photon index (MPI) in the lower panels. The MPI sφ is obtained using the definition: [formula] where, N2 - 6 and N6 - 18 are the number of photons from the top layer of the PPC and E1 = 4 and E2 = 12 are the mean energies in each channel. The Fig. 6a is in the so-called k class. The Fig. 6b is in an unknown class and the Fig. 6c clearly shows the transition from the unknown class to the so-called ρ class. The panels are separated by about three hours.

In the lower panels, the sφ oscillates between ~  2.4 to ~  1.4 in Fig. 6b and in Figs. 6b and 6c, the unknown class produced very noisy photon spectral slope variation. As soon as the ρ class is achieved after one 'semi-ρ' oscillation, noise in sφ is reduced dramatically.

In Fig. 7(a-b), we show light curve and sφ from IXAE data obtained on the 8th of June, 1999 (Chakrabarti et al 2004a). The two panels are from two successive orbits ~  80 minutes apart. In Fig. 7a, the power density spectrum (PDS) is typical of that of the χ class but the count rate was very high compared to what is expected from such a class. A QPO at 4.7Hz is present. The sφ is 0.85 which is harder than what is observed in Fig. 6. When combined with RXTE data of that date (Fig. 7a), one finds that for a long time (~  3000s) there was no signature of any 'dip' -- the characteristic of the θ class. Hence, this must be in an unknown class, more close to χ than any other. RXTE also observed this object on 7th of June, 1999 and found the object to be in the χ class. In Fig. 7b, the light curve in the next orbit of IXAE shows the evidence of the so-called θ class. Interestingly, the spectra gradually 'hardened' to sφ  ~  0.6 just before the 'dip'. The spectra characteristically softened in the 'dip' region with sφ  ~  1.4 as the inner edge of the disk is disappeared. This class transition is confirmed in the data of RXTE also shown in Fig. 7b. The lower panels showed that the spectral slopes obtained for RXTE data calculated in the similar way as sφ was calculated before. Here, the RXTE photons were first binned in 2 - 6 keV and 6 - 15keV energies before computing sφ from [formula], where, E1 = 4keV, E2 = 9keV.

Examples of possible class transitions in other objects

Though the variability classes of other objects have not been studied for other objects as in GRS 1915+105, there are some evidence that the emitted radiation changes specific characteristics in short time periods. In Fig. 8(a-b) we show peculiar features in RXTE light-curves (Nespoli et al. 2003) of GX339-4 taken on MJD 52411 (May 17th, 2002) in two successive orbits. In Fig. 8a, the light curves in the upper panel and the color (ratio of counts in the 16.4-19.8 bands over 3.7-6.5keV bands) in the lower panel are shown. Power density spectra indicated presence of a QPO at ~  6Hz in the second orbit. Detailed study showed that there was no QPO for first two minutes or so into of observation of the second orbit, and then the QPO appeared with variable frequency (Fig. 8b). The appearance of QPOs indicate the formation of an oscillating shock (see Fig. 3, upper-right panel), which is induced by the resonance in cooling time-scale and the infall time-scales from the post-shock flow (Molteni, Sponholz & Chakrabarti, 1996). This resonance could be short lived or transient, since the accretion rate was changing during this observation. More such observations would be essential to classify the nature of variations.

Another example can be provided for GRO 1655-40 in which the state transition has been observed (Sobczak et al. 1999, Remillard et al. 1999). Fig. 9(a-b) shows the spectra at four times with the following PIDs: (i) 20402-02-02-00 (Mar. 05, 1997) to represent high/soft state (lower-right panel of Fig. 3), (ii) 20402-02-25-00 (Aug. 14, 1997) to represent an intermediate hard-state which is lossing matter to the sonic sphere (early stage of lower-left panel of Fig. 3), (iii) 20402-02-24-00 (Aug. 03, 1997) to represent an intermediate soft state just before the state transition (late stage of lower-left panel of Fig. 3) and finally (iv) 20402-02-26-00 (Aug. 18th, 1997) to represent a true hard state (upper right panel of Fig. 3). We fitted the spectra keeping the hydrogen column density fixed at 0.89  ×  1022 atoms per cm- 2 (Zhang et al. 1997). According to the theoretical understanding (Chakrabarti, 1999; 2002b), one should expect case (iii) to have harder spectra compared to case (i) and case (ii) to have a softer spectra compared to case (iv). That is precisely seen in Figs. 9a and 9b respectively. There is no evidence for QPO in both the soft states (Fig. 9a) while a strong QPO is observed in case (ii) at 1.4Hz and 6.4Hz while a weak QPO is observed in case (iv) at 0.2Hz and 0.8Hz (Fig. 9b). If oscillation of shocks correspond to QPOs (Molteni, Sponholz & Chakrabarti, 1996; Chakrabarti & Manickam, 2000) and if shocks also produce outflows (Chakrabarti, 1999) then it is clear that a strong shock (and therefore outflow) is present in case (ii) while there is a weak shock very far out (since [formula], where Rs is the shock location) in case (iv).

The softening of the hard state and the hardening of the soft state spectra have been found to be related to the presence of outflow and return flow respectively (Chakrabarti et al. 2002b). These phenomena occur because when matter goes out of the CENBOL the number of electrons go down for the same source of soft photons and the spectrum is softened. Conversely, when matter returns back, the spectrum is hardened. as a result, the pivotal point between the burst-on and burst-of states (where the wind activity is prominent) shifts outward by a few keV as compared to the pivotal point between the hard and soft states (when the wind activity is relatively lower). This phenomenon is routinely observed in GRS 1915+105. Figs. 10(a-c) show the comparison of spectra in burst-on and burst off states of (a) June 18, 1997, (b) July 10, 1997 and (c) July 12, 1997 respectively. The spectra in the high and the low states for the same object on August 19, 1997 and March 26, 1997 respectively are plotted to establish the shifting of the pivotal point in presence of winds.

Concluding Remarks

Variability class transitions are common in GRS 1915+105 and probably have been seen in GX 339-4 and GRO 1655-40. For a given black hole, there are only two parameters, namely, the accretion rate of the Keplerian component and that of the sub-Keplerian halo which can give rise to these transitions. Alternatively, if one assumed that both the matter is supplied at the outer edge of the disk, then this accretion rate together with the viscosity parameter (α(r,z)) should be enough. In the TCAF solution, the separation of the Keplerian from sub-Keplerian can be achieved by appropriate viscosity parameters, and hence independent variation of the two rates produces the same result.

We presented a few examples of the class transitions in GRS 1915+105 especially using the IXAE experiment abroad IRS P3. The count rate was found to change before and during class transition and the two classes before and after the transition were not found to have 'normal' counts characteristics of those classes. The transition is also through an unknown class. It takes about 2-3 hours for a transition which may typically be the free-fall time-scale of the low-angular momentum (sub-Keplerian) flow. Thus, it is possible that the major cause of transition is the slow change in the accretion rates.

The transitions discussed in this review are related to the galactic black holes only. For extra-galactic black holes, the same phenomenon is expected, but on a quite longer time-scale (as each time interval scales with the mass of the central hole) and it is not clear if this has been observed yet.