=

1.25in .125in .25in

A multi-frequency study of the radio galaxy NGC326

Introduction

NGC326 belongs to the significant fraction of radio galaxies that are characterized by a distorted morphology, but also show some degree of symmetry. Such sources can by classified into two broad schemes: the mirror symmetric ('C'-shapes) and inversion symmetric ('Z'-shapes). There exists a sub-class of 'Z'-symmetry, called 'X'-shapes, which has two separated relic wings almost perpendicular to the currently active lobes (e.g. 3C315). There is a general consensus about the dynamical interpretation of the 'C'-shapes. This kind of distortion is either caused by the translational motion of the jets with respect to the intergalactic medium (wide and narrow angle tails) or by the orbital motion of the galaxy around a nearby companion (e.g. 3C31). The explanation of the 'Z' and 'X'-shapes is still uncertain and matter of debate. The models proposed in the literature invoke jet precession (Rees 1978, Ekers et al. 1978), jet realignment (Wirth et al. 1982), and the buoyancy of the material in the lobes (Worrall et al. 1995).

Source morphology

We present VLA observations of the radio galaxy NGC326 at wavelengths of 2, 3.5, 6, and 20 cm. Data from different arrays were combined in order to improve uv-coverage and sensitivity. Fig. 1 shows four images of the radio galaxy in order of increasing resolution. At a resolution of 10arcsec the most prominent components appear to be the lobe and the two wings. As already noted by Worrall et al. (1995), the overall 'Z'-shaped symmetry of the source is broken by a low surface brightness plume located just above the end of the north-east wing. This plume, evident only in the 20 and 6 cm images, appears not to obey the source symmetry and this constitutes a problem for the jet precession/realignment scenarios. The 15 GHz, 4arcsec resolution, image shows that the north-west jet is, in projection, shorter with respect to the south-east jet and the position of the core does not coincide with the center of symmetry of the extended structure. NGC326 is a double system composed of two nearly equally bright elliptical galaxies in a common envelope ("dumbbell" galaxy). Fig. 1-D shows the VLA image of NGC326 overlayed on the HST image of the galaxy.

Spectral analysis

For the purpose of the spectral and polarization analysis we have made data sets composed of matched resolution images. These images allow us to trace in detail the spectral trends in all regions of the source (see Fig. 2). Further investigations of these spectral trends will give important clues about the interpretation of this peculiar radio galaxy.