Another Co*cryption Method

Introduction

Information security is currently one of the main challenges in computer networks. In the emergent communication paradigm where wireless and wired networks are interoperating, security issues become crucial. Traditional technologies are every day more inadequate and existing standards should be improved for use in resource restricted environments. We aim to develop a secure algorithm for confidentiality, but cheaper in terms of size and computing power.

In many security protocols, a compression algorithm is run prior encrypting the data to increase the security and the bandwidth. These algorithms are run on the original stream. They all stem from research by J. Ziv and A. Lempel who have designed two compression algorithms: LZ77 and LZ78 [\cite=salomon]. After compression, if the speed of computation is taken into account, the compressed data is enciphered with the use of a stream cipher like RC4 (let us recall that RC4 is 15 times quicker than a 3DES and is used in protocols like WEP and SSL [\cite=rescorla]).

In the present paper, we propose to scramble (encipher) a data stream while it is being compressed. We assume the reader familiar with classical compression algorithms and with secret key cryptography for which a good introduction is [\cite=stallings]. The paper is organized as follows: section [\ref=sec:idea] presents the basis of our idea, while section [\ref=sec:related] recalls the related results. In section [\ref=sec:toy-scheme] we illustrate our idea with a "toy" implementation which uses a compression algorithm from the Lempel-Ziv family. Some statistical tests have been made and are presented in section [\ref=sec:analysis].

The idea

Our idea is to encipher the data stream while it is being compressed by a lossless dictionary algorithm. The basic idea which motivates this proposition is that a compressed stream is already almost random and a good candidate to be scrambled by a simple Vernam cipher. This comes from the notion of incompressibility introduced with Kolmogorov complexity. A.N. Kolmogorov [\cite=kolmogorov] has proposed a complexity which speaks about objects rather than the usual classes of languages addressed by classical complexity. Informally, Kolmogorov complexity corresponds to the size of the smallest program p which can print out on its standard output the object x. If [formula], we say that x is compressible, otherwise incompressible. It provides a modern notion of randomness dealing with the quantity of information in individual objects which says that an object x is random if it cannot be represented by a shorter program p whose output is x or, in other words, if x is incompressible [\cite=salomon]. From this point of view, the output of any compression algorithm is an approximation of a random sequence, although highly reversible. Our idea is to scramble the output of a compression algorithm by a Vernam cipher and to do this while the data stream is being compressed in order to avoid to pass the compressed data stream to another encryption process. From the above discussion, the output of our scheme should be almost random.

Related work

Actually, there are two methods sharing the same idea but in a slightly different way. The first one is called concryption and has been patented by Security Dynamics (US Patent #5479512). It is a method for the integrated compression and encryption (concryption) of clear data. For concryption, the clear data and an encryption key are obtained, at least one compression step is performed and at least one encryption step is performed utilizing the encryption key. The encryption step is preferably performed on the final or intermediate results of a compression step, with compression being a multistep operation. The second method is called compryption [\cite=comcryption-rsa] and is due to R. E. Crandall when he was Apple's Chief Cryptographer. Roughly, his idea is to index a great number of entropy compression algorithms by a secret key. He then gets a holistic (one-pass) compress/encrypt algorithm. This method is currently used for enciphering the passwords in the keychain application starting with Mac OS 9 and still used in Mac OS X from Apple. It is recorded under US Patent #6154542, "Method and apparatus for simultaneously encrypting and compressing data".

The proposed scheme

We use the mode of operation of LZ 78 which uses a growing dictionary [\cite=salomon]. It starts with 29 = 512 entries (with the first 256 entries already filled up, eventually after an initial permutation). While this dictionary is in use, 9 bit pointers are written onto the output stream after encryption by a Vernam cipher. When the original dictionary is filled up, its size is doubled to 1024 entries and 10 bit pointers are then used (and encrypted as well) until the pointer size reaches a maximum value set by the user. When the large dictionary is filled up, the program continues without changes to the dictionary but with monitoring the compression ratio. If this ratio falls down a predefined threshold, the dictionary is deleted and a new 512 entries dictionary is started. The algorithm below presents the scheme. In the sequel, we denote by PRBS a pseudo-random Boolean sequence.

The implementation was just made as a proof-of-concept in C++ and using the LEDA library  which provides a sizable collection of data types and algorithms in a form which allows them to be used by non-experts.

The difference with concryption is that we use a single pass compression algorithm while they require the compression to be a multistep operation, and it is not based on an entropy compression algorithm used in the comcryption method, although an entropy compression algorithm could be added to shorten the mostly used pointers which are returned by the algorithm.

Analysis

Though a plot of the output (see figure [\ref=fig:sortie]) is rather encouraging, we were deceived while testing outputs with a χ2 test for which the results were a little bit too weak. This may be explained by the rather bad choice of a "toy" linear feedback shift register for generating the PRBS. We expect the result to be improved with the use of good pseudo-random generators like RC4, or even with so-called "perfect" PRBS generators.

Further testing should be made according to [\cite=FIPS] which requires a PRG to pass a number of statistical tests or the Marsaglia tests, a set of 23 very strong tests of randomness implemented in the Diehard program.

Discussion

Although not truly pseudo-random (but this is also not a pseudo-random generator), the output of our compression and encryption scheme is encouraging if we look at the typical output depicted by figure [\ref=fig:sortie]. Further study should be made with the help of a good pseudo-random generator with classical tests and a fine tuning of all the parameters.

The use of compression and encryption mixed together should increase the bandwidth, decrease the latency as well as it also might decrease the energy consumption required for the same purpose when using encryption after compression for mobile devices or RFID.