LiFeAs: An intrinsic FeAs-based superconductor with Tc=18 K

Until recently the chemical realm of high-Tc superconductivity had been limited mainly to copper oxide-based layered perovskites. The latest search for noncuprate superconductors in strongly correlated electron layered systems has led to the discovery of high-Tc superconductivity in doped quaternary rare-earth iron oxypnictides, ROFePn, (R = rare-earth metal and Pn = pnicogen).[\cite=1] [\cite=2] [\cite=3] These superconductors generated enormous interest in the materials community due to the high Tc's involved (up to 41-55 K), as well as the critical presence of a magnetic component, Fe, considered antithetical to conventional s-wave superconductivity.[\cite=3] [\cite=4] High-pressure studies suggest maximum Tc in R(O,F)FeAs may be about 50 K, but higher Tc's (>  50 K) may yet be discovered in structurally different compounds, yet electronically related to R(O,F)FeAs.[\cite=5] Analogous alkaline earth iron arsenides, AeFe2As2 (Ae = Sr, Ba), reportedly having formal (Fe2As2)2 - layers as in ROFeAs, but separated by simple Ae-layers as in the cuprates, were found to behave similarly.[\cite=6] [\cite=7] The AeFe2As2 phases become superconducting (maximum Tc  ~  37 K) with appropriate substitution of Ae atoms with alkali metals.[\cite=8] [\cite=9] It was also found that isostructural compounds, KFe2As2 and CsFe2As2, with formal (Fe2As2)1 - layers were superconducting, with much lower Tc's of 3.8 K and 2.6 K, respectively.[\cite=9] Moreover, the evolution from a superconducting state to a spin density wave (SDW) state by chemical substitution was observed in K1 - xSrxFe2As2.[\cite=9] Critical to the high-Tc FeAs-superconductors is the need to introduce sufficient amounts of charge carriers: with electrons (n-type) by F-doping (15-20 atm%) or holes (p-type) by Sr-doping (4-13 atm%) in ROFeAs, and (K/Sr)-substitution (40:60 atm%) in AeFe2As2. These results established the unique role of (Fe2As2)-layers in high-Tc superconductivity. Since simple elemental K, Cs, (K/Sr) or (Cs/Sr)-layers separate the (Fe2As2)-layers in the AFe2As2 superconductors, a Li-based analog, LiFeAs, was investigated. Its crystal structure was previously reported to be of the Cu2Sb-type that features a Fe2As2 substructure, similar to the known FeAs-superconductors.[\cite=10] However, the locations of the Li atoms were problematic. Herein we report the synthesis, single crystal structure determination, and superconducting properties of LiFeAs, with Tc = 18 K.

LiFeAs was synthesized from high temperature reactions of high purity Li (ribbons, 99.99%), Fe (pieces, 99.99%) and As (pieces, 99.99%). Stoichiometric amounts of the starting materials were placed and sealed in welded Nb tubes under Ar. The reaction charges were jacketed within evacuated and sealed quartz containers, and heated at 740oC for 24 hours. The reaction was then slowly cooled to room temperature over 1 day. The polycrystalline samples of LiFeAs are black, exhibit metallic luster, and are sensitive to moist air. All preparative manipulations were carried out in a purified Ar-atmosphere glove box, with total O2 and H2O levels <  0.1 ppm. Elemental analyses on single crystals and polycrystalline samples were carried out using an inductively coupled plasma/mass spectrometer (ICPMS), using both laser ablation and acid dissolution. Results of ICPMS analyses indicate a Li:Fe:As mole ratio of 1.00(3):1.03(2):1.00(1), consistent with a stoichiometric composition of LiFeAs. Phase purity and cell parameters of the polycrystalline samples were investigated by powder X-ray diffraction, using a Panalytical X'pert Diffractometer. Sufficiently sized shiny single crystals of LiFeAs were also isolated for X-ray diffraction analyses. Single crystal X-ray structure determination was performed using a Siemens SMART diffractometer equipped with a CCD area detector. A crystal with dimensions of 0.28 x 0.14 x 0.02 mm3 mounted in glass fiber under a stream of cold nitrogen gas at -58oC. Monochromatic Mo Ka1 radiation (=0.71073Å) was used to collect a full hemisphere of data with the narrow-frame method. The data were integrated using the Siemens SAINT program, and the intensities corrected for Lorentz factor, polarization, air absorption, and absorption due to variation in the path length. Empirical absorption correction was applied using a lamina-shaped model, and redundant reflections were averaged. Final unit cell parameters were refined using 512 reflections having I>  10 σ(I).

Results of the single crystal refinement also confirm the conclusions from the chemical analyses. LiFeAs crystallizes in a tetragonal unit cell (P4/nmm), with a = 3.7914(7) Å, c = 6.364(2) Å. The major structural parameters are summarized in Table 1. The crystal structure of LiFeAs, as shown in Figure 1, is isostructural with the PbFCl-type, different from previous reports.[\cite=10] It is also different from the superconducting alkali and alkaline earth metal iron arsenides, (A/Ae)Fe2As2 (A = K, Rb, Cs; Ae = Sr, Ba), that crystallize in the ThCr2Si2-type. However, it is closely related to the "empty" version of LaOFeAs (ZrCuSiAs-type). As in LaOFeAs, LiFeAs features Fe2As2 layers, based on edge-shared tetrahedral FeAs4 units. The Fe2As2 layers can also be derived from the alternate As-capping of the Fe square nets, above and below each center of the Fe squares. The Fe-As bond distance within the layers is 2.4204(4) Å; the nearest Fe-Fe distance is 2.6809(4) Å. The Fe2As2 layers are alternately stacked, along the c-axis, with nominal double layers of Li atoms. The parallel stacking of the FeAs layers in LiFeAs inhibits close interlayer contacts between As atoms. This is different from the 'slipped' stacking in (A,Ae)Fe2As2 wherein adjacent Fe2As2 layers are oriented by a mirror plane perpendicular to c passing through z = 1/2 that allow closer, yet nonbonding, As-As interlayer distances. Although the interlayer distances in LiFeAs (3.182(2) Å) are shorter than the ROFeAs phases, the nearest interlayer As-As distances are long (4.2929(7) Å). More importantly, unlike LaOFeAs, the nominal tetrahedral sites within the nominal Li double layers (Li-Li distances of 3.3218(4) Å), as shown in Figure 1, do not have any notable electron densities, and thus are unoccupied.

The results of our structure determination are different from the conclusions of Wang et al.[\cite=11] which do not agree with the results of our work in terms of the important aspects of chemical composition of the superconducting phase and the crystal structure. Furthermore, we observed superconductivity in the stoichiometric compound with an elemental ratio Li:Fe:As of 1:1:1, in contrast to the conclusion of Ref. [\cite=11] suggesting that a substantial deficiency of Li is needed to induce superconductivity. It is therefore important to verify the real composition which may deviate from the nominal composition if impurity phases form during the synthesis process. The X-ray spectra shown in Fig. 2 do not indicate any impurity phase within the resolution of the measurement. Furthermore, the ICPMS measurements prove the stoichiometric composition of our sample and its uniformity within the high resolution of the methods used. Our conclusions derived from powder and single crystal x-ray diffraction experiments are consistent with recent neutron powder diffraction studies.[\cite=12] The slightly lower superconducting Tc of the latter work (Tc=16 K) is possibly due to the off-stoichiometry (slightly Fe-richer) composition of their samples.

Magnetic susceptibility and transport measurements were performed on single phase polycrystalline samples. The powder diffraction pattern of the sample, as shown in Figure 2, reveals at least 22 reflections that can be indexed to the P4/nmm space group. No impurity phase can be resolved. Electrical resistivity as a function of temperature ϱ(T) were measured using a standard 4-probe method, the magnetic field effect on ρ was determined using a Quantum Design PPMS system for temperatures down to 1.8 K and magnetic fields up to 7 T. The temperature dependence of the dc-magnetic susceptibility χ(T) was measured using a Quantum Design SQUID magnetometer at fields up to 5 T. Thermoelectric power was measured using a low frequency (0.1 Hz) ac technique with a resolution of 0.02 μV/K. During the measurements the amplitude of the sinusoidal temperature modulation was kept constant at 0.25 K.

As shown in Figure 3, LiFeAs exhibits bulk superconductivity as evidenced by a complete diamagnetic shielding signal, with a superconductive transition at Tc=18 K. Resistivity measurements ϱT), in Figure 4, also show that LiFeAs is metallic with ϱ decreasing with temperature, and features a markedly negative curvature. This negative curvature can be a consequence of strong electron-electron correlation, as in KFe2As2, or from strong electron-phonon interaction. The ϱ dramatically drops to almost zero below 18 K. A residual resistance observed below Tc is due to grain boundary contributions.

The superconducting transition indicated by the ϱ(T) and χ(T) plots are consistent with the thermoelectric power S(T) data in Figure 5. The thermoelectric power, less sensitive to grain boundaries of polycrystalline samples, is zero below Tc within the resolution of the measurement. Also, the large negative thermoelectric power of LiFeAs indicates its major carriers are electron-like (n-type), similar to the R(O/F)FeAs superconductors, and in contrast to the hole-like carriers in KFe2As2 and (K/Sr)Fe2As2.[\cite=9] Furthermore, applied magnetic field is observed to suppress the transitions, as expected for superconducting compounds (Figure 4 inset). The critical field H vs. Tc is shown in the inset of Figure 3, with Tc defined at resistivity values corresponding to changes of 5, 10, 30, and 50 % in the total drop across Tc. Using the Ginzburg-Landau formula for the critical field, Hc(t) = Hc(0) * (1 - t2) / 1 + t2) with t = T / Tc, a high zero-temperature critical field (Hc2) >   80 Tesla can be extrapolated from the data derived from the 5 % resistivity drop (Fig. 3).

LiFeAs is isoelectronic with AeFe2As2 and LnOFeAs, in that all have formal (Fe2As2)2 - layers. In these three compounds elemental Li-double layers, Sr or Ba layers, or (R2O2) slabs separate the charge carrying (Fe2As2)-layers. This arrangement is similar to the Ae- or R-based layers that separate current carrying (CuO2)-layers in high-Tc cuprates. Furthermore, undoped parent phases of previously reported iron arsenides are not superconducting at ambient pressures, but exhibit magnetic ordering. Spin density wave (SDW) transitions are observed in AeFe2As2 (Ae = Sr, Ba)[\cite=7] and LaOFeAs.[\cite=1] It is therefore surprising that intrinsic LiFeAs does not appear to show a SDW, but exhibits superconductivity with a respectable Tc=18 K. The superconducting behavior of LiFeAs can be roughly explained by assuming incomplete charge transfer from the strongly polarizing Li atoms to the electron-rich (Fe2As2)2 - layers. However, this would lead to hole-like behavior of the carriers, in conflict with the thermoelectric power data. The inconsistency may arise from changes in the conduction bands of the FeAs-layers due to variations in inter-layer distances. Detailed band structure calculations as recently reported[\cite=13] could help to deepen the insight into the electronic structure and the Fermi surface to understand the complex properties of this class of compounds. High pressure experiments and varying the electron counts on the (Fe2As2)2  ±  x layers on the superconducting properties of LiFeAs by chemical doping may help unravel the puzzle. One may also infer that the character of charge carriers (electrons or holes) is related to the stacking arrangement of the (Fe2As2)-layers. Proper explanation of the puzzling behavior of LiFeAs would significantly help elucidate the mechanism of high-Tc superconductivity in the layered iron pnictides, as well as the layered cuprates. The similarities between the layered FeAs superconductors and the layered cuprate superconductors have been pointed out previously by us and others. Thus, LiFeAs may be equivalent to the infinite layered member of the high-Tc cuprates.

In conclusion, a high-Tc Fe-based superconductor, LiFeAs, with a Tc of 18 K and a very high Hc2 has been reported and its structure unambiguously determined. Addition of LiFeAs to the list of structurally different, yet isoelectronic FeAs-superconductors provides further evidence to the important role of FeAs-layers in this class of high-Tc materials. The electron nature of the carriers and superconductivity in undoped LiFeAs raise interesting questions that warrant detailed band structure calculations and further experiments.