=

1.25in .125in .25in

AGN Unification: An Update

Introduction

Based on nearly 20 years of detailed investigations of active galaxies, a unification paradigm has emerged in which active galactic nuclei share certain fundamental ingredients (illustrated in Fig. 1): [formula] a supermassive black hole, [formula]; [formula] an accretion disk and corona, heated by magnetic and/or viscous processes so that it radiates at optical through soft X-ray energies; [formula] high velocity gas, usually referred to as the broad-line region; [formula] lower velocity gas in the narrow line region; [formula] an obscuring torus (or other geometrical form) of gas and dust, hiding the broad-line region from some directions; and [formula] a relativistic jet, formed within [formula] Schwarzschild radii of the black hole, and extending outward for tens of kpc, and in some cases, as much as a Mpc. Except perhaps for the last item, the unification paradigm holds that all AGN have the same ingredients, though certainly with intrinsic variations in black hole mass, ionization parameter, size, density, luminosity, etc. According to unification, many of the principal observational characteristics of AGN -- such as overall spectral energy distribution and emission line type (broad- or narrow-line) -- stem from orientation rather than some fundamental intrinsic difference.

Relativistic jets are almost certainly present in all radio-loud AGN though with a range of intrinsic kinetic powers. The weaker jets decelerate relatively close to the central engine, often within the galaxy, while more powerful jets plow through the interstellar medium and into the intergalactic medium before forming large-scale radio lobes. Much ink has been devoted to the question of why some AGN are radio-quiet and others radio-loud (roughly 5-10% are radio-loud, although the fraction increases with AGN and/or host galaxy luminosity). These can be divided into "apples and oranges" theories -- i.e., that radio-loud and radio-quiet AGN are actually different beasts, with some defining difference such as black hole mass, or magnetic field near the black hole -- and "Macintosh and Macoun" theories -- i.e., that fundamentally the AGN are similar, but the combination of jet power (which has an intrinsic spread) and host galaxy density (ditto) conspires to permit the formation of a bright radio source or to squelch the jet before it propagates far enough to be visible; see § 5. Obscuration is less controversial but more poorly known. Local AGN obscuration has been well studied, starting with the spectropolarimetric observations of Antonucci & Miller (1985), which suggested the obscuration occupies a substantial solid angle and blocks the broad-line region and accretion disk from certain lines of sight. That is, the distinction between type 1 AGN (which have both broad and narrow emission lines) and type 2 AGN (only narrow emission lines) appears to be largely one of orientation with respect to the line of sight, at least locally. (There is still some controversy about this simple picture; in particular, whether torus geometry depends on luminosity and whether excess starburst activity is associated with type 2 AGN; see Veilleux 2003.)

At higher redshift, the situation is much less clear. A few luminous type 2 AGN have been found at [formula]-3 (e.g., Stern et al. 2002; Norman et al. 2002), but certainly not as many as type 1 quasars found in optical/UV surveys at these redshifts. One of the outstanding questions in AGN research today is the question of obscured AGN at the "quasar epoch" -- how common are they relative to type 1 AGN? The next few years will certainly provide an answer, with deep multiwavelength surveys like GOODS, SWIRE, and others (§ 4).

The Unification Paradigm for Active Galaxies

Active Galactic Nuclei go by a long list of names: AGN, quasars, QSO (quasi-stellar object), blazars, BL Lac objects, Seyfert galaxies, radio galaxies, FR1 (Fanaroff-Riley type 1), FR2, etc. The unification paradigm, as described above, holds that orientation-dependent observational differences define these categories, rather than intrinsic differences. Originally, "quasar" meant radio loud (from quasi-stellar radio source) and "QSO" meant radio quiet; subsequently the term quasar has been used to refer to all luminous AGN. Some define an operational distinction between "AGN" and "QSO" or "quasar" (e.g., MV  <   - 23 mag means a quasar); however, AGN properties are similar and continuous from low to high luminosities, making this cut completely arbitrary. Furthermore, this distinction is usually made in optical luminosity, which constitutes a highly variable fraction of the bolometric luminosity (~  10% in type 1 AGN, [formula]% in type 2 AGN). This makes the AGN/quasar distinction artificial, so we use the term AGN for all luminosities.

It is important to note that there are really two separate unification schemes by orientation: optical and radio. The optical scheme explains the presence or absence of broad line emission by the orientation of the obscuring torus, while the radio scheme explains the core-dominated (flat-spectrum) versus lobe-dominated (steep-spectrum) radio-loud AGN by orientation with respect to the jet axis. The two schemes are related in that the axis of symmetry is almost certainly the same, but the viewing angle dependences are quite different, one dominated by optical depth and structure of the obscuring dust and gas, the other by the beaming pattern, which depends on the Doppler factor(s).

The first scheme arose from spectropolarimetric observations that showed broad lines in polarized light from Seyfert 2 galaxies, as if the broad emission lines were being scattered into the line of sight (Antonucci & Miller 1985). Further evidence that obscuration is likely to be important in AGN, at least out to redshift [formula] or so, comes from the spectrum of the X-ray "background," which is very hard (Fig. 2), rising sharply in the 2-10 keV band and peaking (in EFE) near 40 keV. Type 1 AGN have much softer X-ray spectra, and thus a simple summation of unobscured AGN spectra would not produce the observed emission. Instead, it has been speculated that photoelectric absorption in the soft X-ray band hardens the X-ray spectrum of the sources that constitute the bulk of the X-ray background, implying there must be large numbers of obscured AGN at least out to [formula]. (At higher redshifts, the observed radiation is rest-frame harder X-rays, increasingly unlikely to be affected by absorption.) Indeed, spectral synthesis models predict large numbers of obscured AGN at high redshift (e.g., Gilli, Risaliti & Salvati 1999; Gilli, Salvati & Hasinger 2001), roughly 4-10 times as many as unobscured AGN, although these models do not match the observed redshift distribution of AGN (Hasinger 2002; cf., § 4).

In some ways, the radio unification scheme is on firmer ground (Urry & Padovani 1995). There is abundant evidence for relativistic motion in the cores of flat-spectrum radio sources (the ones pointing toward us), as evidenced by: [formula] High brightness temperatures, in some cases well above the limit from the Compton catastrophe. [formula] Superluminal motion on parsec scales (Vermeulen & Cohen 1994; Tingay et al. 1998) and, in M87, on the kpc scale as well (Biretta et al. 1995). [formula] The predominance of one-sided jets, as if Doppler beaming were acting even out to hundreds of kiloparsecs (Bridle & Perley 1984). [formula] Depolarization asymmetries, i.e., the highly significant tendency for the greater Faraday depolarization of the large-scale radio lobes to occur on the counter-jet side, as if indeed the more distant lobe is on the side where the jet is moving away (Laing 1988; Garrington et al. 1988).

The newest evidence in favor of relativistic beaming even on large scales is the discovery of X-ray emission from jets on kiloparsec scales (Fig. 3). In a recent Chandra survey of radio jets, Sambruna et al. (2002, 2003) showed that optical and X-ray emission from radio jets is common, and that for the higher redshift cases, it is well explained by a model in which relativistic electrons in the jet inverse-Compton scatter infrared photons from the cosmic microwave background (CMB). In the absence of relativistic beaming, the energy density of the CMB would be too low to be significant, but with bulk relativistic motion, the electrons "see" a more intense photon field. In addition, after scattering, the high-energy radiation is also beamed. Thus for blazar jets (at small angles to the line of sight), particularly luminous sources at moderate to high redshift, production of X-rays via this "external Compton/CMB" model is quite plausible, provided the bulk relativistic motion persists on large scales (tens to hundreds of kiloparsecs). The optical radiation in these cases is usually interpreted at the high-frequency extension of the synchrotron spectrum.

Some of the jets discovered by Sambruna et al. are quite long ([formula] kpc), meaning de-projected lengths ten times larger for typical beaming parameters and orientation angles. The kinetic power in such jets is considerable.

Does AGN Unification Fit the Number Densities?

Because the Doppler beaming pattern is well known in the simplest uni-directional models, it is possible to calculate the effect of beaming on the luminosity function (Urry & Shafer 1984; Padovani & Urry 1991). The effect is to distribute objects of the same intrinsic luminosity across a wide range of observed luminosities, flattening the slope of the luminosity function. The effect is greatest at low luminosities, where the numbers of objects are large, and then steepens to parallel the intrinsic luminosity function (at much higher observed luminosity).

Assuming the simplest plausible picture -- that each radio-loud AGN has a relativistic jet characterized by a single Doppler factor (one direction, one velocity), that each has a fixed fraction of total luminosity in intrinsic jet luminosity, and with a plausible distribution of Lorentz factors among jets -- it is straightforward to calculate the luminosity function that would be observed. In particular, we assume radio galaxies are roughly in the plane of the sky and thus not strongly affected by beaming, so that their luminosity function is essentially the parent luminosity function (with a small, calculable correction for overall normalization). We then divide radio-loud AGN into steep-spectrum and flat-spectrum quasars, and predict the expected luminosity functions for each class, subject to known constraints on the ratio of core to extended radio flux (Padovani & Urry 1992). Mean Lorentz factors [formula], compatible with the observed superluminal velocities, fit the number densities very well (see Fig. 4).

Obscured AGN at Redshift > 1

Tests of optical obscuration unification are imminent now that surveys sensitive to obscured AGN are being carried out. The common method for finding quasars -- UV excess surveys -- is obviously a poor way to find UV-deficient AGN. Even the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (which can use unbiased color selection or spectroscopic selection) will mis-classify some obscured AGN as galaxies, since their optical nuclei will be completely obscured. (Surveys for narrow emission line objects are an exception, and have turned up some interesting results in the local universe; see Hao & Strauss 2004, this volume.) In hard X-rays, however, AGN are the dominant population, and the infrared should also be strong because of re-radiation of absorbed UV/soft X-radiation by the heated dust. Hence the issue of obscured AGN at moderate to high redshift is an ideal problem for the HST Treasury and SIRTF Legacy projects.

Enter GOODS, the Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey, which was awarded roughly 800 hours of SIRTF observing time and 412 orbits of HST time. Because of the area and sensitivity of the Advanced Camera for Surveys, GOODS achieves nearly the depth of the Hubble Deep Field (Williams et al. 1996) but with roughly 100 times the area. The GOODS project targets the two deepest Chandra fields, largely on the basis of the AGN investigation. The HST data are now completed and mosaics are being made public; SIRTF was launched in August 2003; GOODS SIRTF observations begin early in 2004.

Early GOODS AGN papers include a discussion of z-band dropouts, which might be highly obscured and/or high-redshift AGN (Koekemoer et al. 2003), and an estimate of the space density of high-redshift AGN (Cristiani et al. 2003), essentially confirming earlier work on the Chandra Deep Field North (Barger et al. 2001). Our group has looked at the z-band magnitude distribution of X-ray sources (Fig. 5), which shows two peaks, brighter and fainter than [formula] mag. Obscured AGN can account for the faint peak providing one recognizes that they are preferentially excluded from spectroscopic samples, and thus that observed redshift distributions omit most of these (Treister et al. 2003).

With its unique combination of ultra-deep X-ray ( Chandra) and infrared ( SIRTF) imaging, GOODS is ideal for finding obscured AGN, and the deep multicolor HST imaging allows to separate the host galaxy and nucleus. However, the GOODS area is small, and thus the volume too small to find typical luminous AGN, LX  >  1045 erg/s. To study luminous obscured AGN, larger survey areas are needed. This is one of the motivations for MUSYC, the MUltiwavelength Survey of Yale and Calan, a deep optical and infrared survey covering one square degree in four southern and equatorial fields. Chandra, XMM, and SIRTF imaging is or will be available for at least two of the four fields. The X-rays can be used to pinpoint likely AGN, and the infrared can be used to discriminate starbursts from AGN and to find partially obscured nuclei. The COSMOS 2-degree survey, with its X-ray, infrared, and optical coverage, will also find obscured AGN and enable detailed study of their host galaxies as a function of AGN luminosity and local galaxy density. The SWIRE and MIPS GTO surveys with SIRTF, and the GEMS survey with HST, will also provide important complementary coverage at different flux levels in the number counts, and thus should provide strong constraints on the cosmic evolution of the obscuration in AGN. Obviously SDSS is already making important contributions (Zakamska et al. 2003), as is the 2dF survey. Purely optical surveys, of course, will always be biased against obscured AGN.

These deep, large-area multiwavelength surveys address several questions: [formula] AGN geometry. What is the distribution and scale of the obscuring dust? Long time scale monitoring of infrared emission (reverberation mapping of the dust) suggests the physical scales are light-months (Clavel et al. 1989), and ISO observations offer some constraints on the aspect ratio (Clavel et al. 2000). [formula] Dependence of geometry on redshift or luminosity. There have been many suggestions that more luminous AGN have less obscuration, starting with Lawrence (1987), in part because no luminous obscured AGN had been found at high redshift. Yet some of these arguments are based on surveys that would not have found obscured AGN in any case, given their blue bias. [formula] Demographics of black holes. How many AGN are there at the "quasar epoch"? AGNs are markers of black holes of substantial mass, and certainly of the peak accretion period. Possibly the period of maximum AGN activity represents the simultaneous growth of the black hole and the formation of the galaxy (Kormendy & Gebhardt 2001).

One critical issue is estimating bolometric luminosities of AGN when we know their emission is highly anisotropic. The observed spectral energy distributions (SEDs) of neither type 1 nor type 2 AGN are bolometric, at least if the unification paradigm is even approximately correct. Instead, far-infrared and hard X-ray emission are approximately isotropic (and thus a faithful representation of the intrinsic emission) but the type 1s are over-luminous in the UV through soft X-ray, and type 2s are underluminous, compared to the angle-averaged emission. Given this, properly matching samples of type 1 and type 2 AGN (to test unification, for example) is not as straightforward as many authors have assumed. A hard X-ray-selected sample of AGN would avoid much bias, but to date we do not yet have large areas done very deep with a high fraction of source identifications. With Chandra, larger area surveys are now starting to be done, with perhaps the most obvious being the extended CDF-S area (GEMS).

Host Galaxies and Black Hole Properties

The ultimate aim in AGN studies is to understand the intrinsic physical parameters of AGN, starting with mass, accretion rate, and black hole spin -- quantities that may be obscured (pardon the pun) by orientation effects. Here we discuss AGN host galaxies and review the current knowledge of black hole masses in AGN, and how they relate (or do not relate) to observed AGN properties.

AGN host galaxies appear, in every way we can easily measure, to be like normal galaxies. For example, the Kormendy relation -- a projection of the fundamental plane onto the two morphological parameters, re (half-light radius) and μe (surface brightness at the half-light radius) -- is the same for AGN as it is for normal galaxies (Fig. 6; Urry et al. 2000, O'Dowd et al. 2002, Taylor et al. 1996, Dunlop et al. 2003). Despite some claims to the contrary, it has been obvious for a while that AGN luminosity is largely de-coupled from host galaxy properties. Over a range of 5 orders of magnitude in nuclear luminosity, the host galaxies of radio-loud AGN (quasars and BL Lacs) cluster within one magnitude of the average value. There is no believable correlation between host galaxy luminosity and AGN luminosity (O'Dowd et al. 2002).

Inspired by this result, we investigated the relation of black hole mass to observable properties like AGN luminosity. There were claims in the literature that these were correlated, but these claims were either wildly optimistic or resulted from the use of the AGN luminosity to derive the black hole mass (thus the tautology that AGN luminosity is correlated with itself). Instead, when we collected several hundred black hole mass estimates, we found that there is essentially no correlation with AGN luminosity (Woo & Urry 2002a; Fig. 7). There is a rough trend such that the Eddington limit provides an approximate upper limit to the AGN luminosity, but apart from that, AGN appear at all masses and luminosities. At a minimum, this means that there is a wide range of Eddington ratios in AGN. The Eddington ratio does not correlate with mass or luminosity either. Such limits as are seen in the plots (Woo & Urry 2002a) are selection effects, either from the survey flux limit or from the steepness of the luminosity function (high luminosities and/or high black hole masses are rare) or from the likely mis-identification of AGN as normal galaxies (when the nucleus reaches low enough luminosity relative to the host galaxy). Selection effects are particularly nasty; almost all the structure seen in the mass versus luminosity plots for AGN derive from the original flux limits and/or volume limits (see Woo & Urry 2002a for details).

We also investigated whether radio power could be related to black hole mass (Woo & Urry 2002b), as has been suggested by a number of authors (Franceschini, Vercellone, & Fabian 1998; McLure et al. 1999; Lacy et al. 2001; Nagar et al. 2002; Jarvis & McLure 2002). However, there are radio-loud AGN with low black hole masses (Ho 2002; Oshlack, Webster, & Whiting 2001), and we found radio-quiet AGN with very high black hole masses, in the range [formula]. Thus there appears to be no requirement for radio-loud objects to have high black hole masses, nor does high black hole mass imply radio loudness.

So, contrary to some previously published claims: [formula] There is no correlation of AGN luminosity or Eddington ratio with black hole mass, apart from an upper envelope around L / LEdd  ~  10 - 100. [formula] There is no correlation of Eddington ratio with AGN luminosity. It is often asserted that the most luminous AGN (quasars) have high Eddington ratios while low-luminosity AGN have low Eddington ratios. There is a gross trend in this direction, but in our samples it can be ascribed entirely to selection effects (cf., Merloni et al. 2004, this volume). [formula] There is no relation between radio loudness and black hole mass.

Summary

Decades of research have documented the inherently anisotropic nature of AGN, and thus unification must be the case to at least some extent. It remains to be seen how much intrinsic variation there is in the fundamental AGN properties (black hole mass, accretion rate, and black hole spin) and in AGN structure. It is likely that obscuration and/or AGN structure evolves, and that unification locally is different in detail from unification at the quasar epoch.

Radio unification and the effects of relativistic beaming are well understood and seem to explain well the family of radio-loud AGN. Lorentz factors of order 10 explain well the numbers of steep-spectrum and flat-spectrum radio-loud quasars relative to radio galaxies, and also fit with the observed superluminal velocities and the core dominance parameters.

The number of obscured AGN is unclear. There should be a substantial population of them at [formula], as suggested from the X-ray background. Deep multiwavelength surveys sensitive to obscured AGN are just now being carried out, and these questions will surely be answered in the next year. These surveys will also shed light on the relation of obscured AGN to starbursts and ultra-luminous IR galaxies, which Sanders et al. (1988) long ago suggested were shrouded quasars in formation. The links found since then between the host galaxies and the active nucleus lend support to this suggestion, and direct observation of the link is within reach.

Finally, black hole mass is not an important parameter as far as defining the appearance of an AGN. It is essentially uncorrelated with AGN luminosity, contrary to popular myth. Nor is it correlated with radio power -- whatever the jet formation mechanism, it is not strongly dependent on black hole mass. The distribution of jet power is one of the remaining great unknowns. Studies of blazar jets and blazar demographics will answer this question.

We are now poised to take unification to the next level, and to have a Grand Unification of AGN with galaxies. Within the next few years, we should be able to determine whether AGN are indeed a common phase in galaxy evolution, and to probe the co-evolution of galaxies and black holes.