On the efficiency of production of the Fe Kα emission line in neutral matter

Introduction

The narrow (FWHM < 104 km s- 1) fluorescent Fe Kα emission line at ~  6.4 keV is a ubiquitous feature in the X-ray spectra of both type 1 and type 2 active galactic nuclei (AGNs), its centroid energy indicating an origin in cold, neutral matter (e.g. Sulentic et al. 1998; Yaqoob & Padmanabhan 2004; Levenson et al. 2006, and references therein). The Fe Kα line at ~  6.4 keV is also an important diagnostic in some X-ray binary systems (e.g. White et al. 1995; Watanabe et al. 2003; Paul et al. 2005; Miller 2007, and references therein). The equivalent width (EW) and luminosity of the Fe Kα line are nontrivial to calculate, except when the total Fe K band (~  6-7 keV) optical depth of the line to absorption and scattering is ≪  1. In general, the observed EW and line flux depend, at the very least, on the geometry, column density of the line-emitting matter, covering factor, element abundances, and the orientation of the structure relative to the observer's line of sight. Using cosmic abundances from Anders & Grevesse (1989) and photoelectric cross-section from Verner et al. (1996), it is straightforward to show that the optical depth of the Fe Kα line to absorption plus Compton scattering is τtot  ~  0.027N22, where N22 is the column density, NH, in units of 1022 cm- 2. Thus, τtot is already ~  0.1 for column densities as low as 4  ×  1022 cm- 2 so that we expect EWs and line fluxes calculated using an optically-thin approximation to break down even for column densities lower than ~  1023 cm- 2. Indeed, using detailed Monte Carlo simulations of a toroidal X-ray reprocessor, Murphy & Yaqoob (2009; hereafter MY09) showed that geometrical and inclination-angle effects begin to become important for NH  ~  1023 cm- 2.

Whilst detailed calculations of the Fe Kα line EW for various geometries are abundant in the literature (e.g. Leahy & Creighton 1993; Ghisellini et al. 1994; Krolik et al. 1994; Nandra & George 1994; Matt et al. 1999; Ikeda, Awaki, & Terashima 2009; MY09), detailed information on the Fe Kα line flux (or luminosity) is lacking. In some situations, one may be interested in the absolute flux of the Fe Kα line (in addition to, or instead of the EW). For example, we may want to know the fraction of the number of photons (or fraction of the luminosity) in the continuum above the Fe K photoelectric absorption edge threshold energy that appear in the Fe Kα emission line. Since the reprocessed, scattered X-ray continuum at any particular energy is a complicated function of the column density, geometry, and system inclination angle, the Fe Kα emission-line flux cannot be trivially calculated from the EW. In some situations, it may be more appropriate, or easier, to compare and interpret the Fe Kα line flux from different models (as opposed to the EW). In the present paper we calculate the efficiency of production of the Fe Kα line, expressed as the ratio of the number of photons in the emission line to the number of photons in the illuminating continuum, above the Fe K edge absorption threshold energy. We utilize Monte Carlo results from the toroidal X-ray reprocessor model of Murphy & Yaqoob, described in detail in MY09, but we also discuss the generalization of our results to other geometries.

The paper is organized as follows. In §[\ref=mytorusmodel] we give an overview of the details of the Monte Carlo model. In §[\ref=lineflux] we present the results for calculations of the efficiency of production of the Fe Kα line in the context of a toroidal X-ray reprocessor model. In §[\ref=othergeom] we discuss the generalization of our results for other geometries and arbitrary covering factors. In §[\ref=application] we apply our results to the well-known Seyfert galaxy MCG -  6-30-15. We summarize our results and conclusions in §[\ref=torusconcl].

Toroidal X-ray reprocessor model

We have constructed a Monte-Carlo code to calculate grids of Green's functions to model the passage of X-rays through a toroidal reprocessor. The model, and some basic results, have been described in detail in MY09. Here we give a brief overview of the critical assumptions that the model is based upon. Our geometry is an azimuthally-symmetric doughnut-like torus with a circular cross-section, characterized by only two parameters, namely the half-opening angle, θ0, and the equatorial column density, NH (see MY09 for details). The inclination angle between the observer's line of sight and the symmetry axis of the torus is given by θobs, where θobs [formula] corresponds to a face-on observing angle and θobs [formula] corresponds to an edge-on observing angle (see MY09 for exact definitions of the face-on and edge-on angle bins). We assume that the X-ray source emits isotropically and that the reprocessing material is uniform and essentially neutral (cold). For illumination by an X-ray source that is emitting isotropically, the mean column density, integrated over all incident angles of rays through the torus, is N̄H = (π / 4)NH. The column density may also be expressed in terms of the Thomson depth: τT  =  (11 / 9)NHσT  ~  0.81N24 where N24 is the column density in units of 1024 cm- 2. Here, we have employed the mean number of electrons per H atom, [formula], where μ is the mean molecular weight. Note that this assumes that the abundance of He is 10% by number and that the number of electrons from all other elements aside from H and He is negligible (i.e. μ  =  13 / 9).

The value of θ0 for which we have calculated a comprehensive set of Green's functions is [formula], for NH in the range 1022 - 25 cm- 2, using input energies up to 500 keV- see MY09 for details. For [formula], the solid angle subtended by the torus at the X-ray source, ΔΩ, is 2π (and we refer to

[formula]

Efficiency of production of the Fe Kα line

Observational measurements of the equivalent width (EW) and/or flux of the fluorescent Fe Kα emission line in the literature generally refer to the zeroth-order emission only, since the line is typically fitted with a Gaussian. The scattered flux (i.e., the Compton shoulder) can carry up to ~  40% of the zeroth-order flux, depending on the geometry and column density of the matter (e.g. Matt 2002; MY09). However, the scattered part of the line, or Compton shoulder, is generally not fitted (usually because it is not detected), or, if it is fitted, a separate EW or flux is quoted. On the other hand, part of the Compton shoulder may be blended with the zeroth-order line since most of the flux of the Compton shoulder spans an energy range that stretches from the zeroth-order line energy to ~  6.25 keV. The amount of blending depends on the column density, geometry, and orientation of the line emitter, as well as the velocity broadening and instrumental spectral resolution. However, in the remainder of the paper, the Fe Kα line flux, intensity, luminosity, or EW, will always refer to the zeroth-order (unscattered) part of the emission line. Corrections for the Compton shoulder should be made that are appropriate for a particular situation.

We define the efficiency of production of the Fe Kα emission line, xFe Kα, as the ratio of the line flux, IFeKα, to the integrated flux in the incident X-ray continuum above the Fe K absorption edge threshold energy, EK:

[formula]

Here, EK is the threshold energy for Fe K-shell absorption, and we adopt the Verner et al. (1996) value of 7.124 keV. Assuming a power-law incident continuum, with photon index Γ,

[formula]

where IFe Kα,n refers to the line flux renormalized to an incident continuum that has a monochromatic flux of 1 photon cm- 2 s- 1 keV- 1 at 1 keV. The efficiency does not of course depend on the absolute normalization of the continuum. Note that the definition for the efficiency explicitly assumes that the intrinsic X-ray continuum emission is isotropic and emitted into a solid angle of 4π. However, IFe Kα,n refers to the observed line flux so the efficiency may have an inclination-angle dependence. In the definition of xFe Kα we choose to use an upper limit of infinity because we find from our Monte Carlo simulations that when the medium becomes Compton-thick, downscattering of photons with initial energies much higher than even 20 keV to lower energies enables those high-energy photons to make significant contributions to the Fe Kα line flux. This is illustrated in Fig. 1 which shows, for several column densities, the number of Fe Kα emission-line photons resulting from continuum photons injected into the medium at an energy E, as a fraction of the number of line photons resulting from continuum photons injected at 7.2 keV (just above the Fe K absorption edge). For example, it can be seen that for NH  =  5  ×  1024 cm- 2 (dotted line, Fig. 1), the curve breaks at ~  11 keV, becoming flatter at higher energies. For NH  =  1025 cm- 2 (upper solid line, Fig. 1) the curve breaks and becomes flatter at ~  15 keV. An upper limit of infinity on the integral in equation [\ref=eqn:effgendef] is also less arbitrary than choosing a specific value. In practice, the incident X-ray continuum in AGN will steepen and cut off at high energies (a few hundred keV in AGN - e.g. see Dadina 2008, and references therein). The effect of such a cut-off will give a somewhat larger efficiency than that given by equation [\ref=eqn:effgendef]. However, our purpose is to facilitate the estimation of the absolute Fe Kα line flux; corrections required for different incident continua can easily be calculated. It is also worth mentioning that the absorption opacity above the Fe K edge is not due mostly to Fe. The ratio of the Fe K shell opacity to the sum of all of the other absorption opacities (for the cross-sections and abundances that we have adopted) is 0.51 just above the Fe K shell threshold energy, and never exceeds 0.61.

In the optically-thin limit for which absorption and scattering optical depths in the Fe K band (~  6-7 keV) are ≪  1, we can obtain an analytic expression for xFe Kα. We can adopt the optically-thin expression for the Fe Kα line EW in MY09 and multiply by the continuum at 6.4 keV in this limit. We get

[formula]

where

[formula]

The quantity

[formula]

Effect of Fe abundance and mild ionization

A higher abundance of Fe, AFe, will increase xFe Kα. In the optically-thin limit the increase in xFe Kα will be in direct proportion to AFe. However, the total absorption opacity at 6.4 keV also increases. If AFe increases by a factor 10, the absorption opacity at 6.4 keV increases by a factor of 2.5 and the total opacity to absorption plus scattering increases by a factor 2.0. Therefore, as the column density increases, the value of xFe Kα as a function of NH will reach a maximum for smaller values of NH relative to the case for cosmic Fe abundance. The maximum value for xFe Kα must be much less than the optically-thin value for these values of NH and AFe (equation [\ref=eqn:thinlimit]). Therefore, even if we increase AFe by a factor of 10 relative to the cosmic value, the maximum Fe Kα line efficiency will only increase by much less than a factor of 10. We performed some Monte Carlo calculations using the MY09 toroidal reprocessor model with the Fe abundance increased by a factor 10 relative to the cosmic value and found that the maximum Fe Kα line efficiency increased by a factor of ~  2.8, to ~  3.2%, attained for a face-on inclination angle, and NH ~  3 - 4  ×  1023 cm- 2. For an edge-on inclination angle the maximum value of xFe Kα increased by a factor of ~  3.3 relative to the cosmic Fe abundance value, to ~  2%, for NH ~  1 - 2  ×  1023 cm- 2.

The calculations in the present paper pertain specifically to neutral matter. Ionization states of Fe higher than Fe  xvii are not relevant to our discussion because we are making predictions for the Fe Kα line in AGN that peaks at 6.4 keV. Even ionization states of Fe  xvii give an Fe Kα line energy that is higher than observed (~  6.43 keV -e.g. Palmeri et al. 2003; Mendoza et al. 2004), and ionization states of Fe  xii or lower are likely to be more appropriate (e.g. see Yaqoob et al. 2007). Mild ionization will have the effect of increasing the Fe Kα line efficiency due to the reduced absorption opacities impeding the escape of line photons. We have investigated the effect of mild ionization on the Fe Kα line efficiency in the context of the MY09 toroidal reprocessor model using a simple approach that gives a conservative upper limit on the Fe Kα line efficiency. We used the xstar photoionization code (e.g. Kallman et al. 2004) to estimate the ionization parameter, ξ , for which the Fe K edge energy moves to ~  7.4 keV (appropriate for Fe  xii-see Verner et al. 1996), up from the neutral Fe value of ~  7.1 keV. Although the geometry assumed by xstar is a spherical shell, our simple approach will still give a useful upper limit because in practice only the inner surface of the toroidal reprocessor will be ionized but we simply substituted the total absorption opacities for all elements throughout the torus with the reduced opacities calculated by xstar. We used a column density of 5  ×  1023 cm- 2 but calculated the absorption cross-sections per unit column density so that we could scale the cross-section for other column densities when applied in the toroidal Monte Carlo code. For a column density of 5  ×  1023 cm- 2 we found an upper limit on log ξ of 1.8 for the Fe K edge threshold energy to remain below ~  7.4 keV. Thus we used the total absorption cross-section for log ξ = 1.8 throughout the torus. Again, this procedure will underestimate the absorption at the energy of the Fe Kα line, consistent with the goal of obtaining a conservative upper limit to the Fe Kα line efficiency. We retained the K-shell cross-section for neutral Fe because it decreases slowly with increasing ionization state. We also retained the fluorescence yield for neutral Fe, which increases slowly with increasing ionization state. The changes in both K-shell cross-section and fluorescence yield are less than 15% up to Fe  xvii, and the opposite sense of the changes tend to compensate each other (e.g. Bambynek et al. 1972) to some extent. We obtained the result that, using these very conservative assumptions, the maximum Fe Kα line efficiency increases to 1.8%, the maximum being obtained for the same column density and orientation as the strictly neutral torus (i.e. a face-on inclination angle and NH  ~  7 - 8  ×  1023 cm- 2, or N̄H  ~  5.5 - 6.2  ×  1023 cm- 2). This corresponds to a maximum enhancement in the Fe Kα line efficiency of ~  50% for mild ionization compared to the case of purely neutral matter.

Other geometries and covering factors

In the limit when a medium is optically-thin to absorption and scattering in the Fe K band (~  6-7 keV), the relation between the Fe Kα line efficiency and NH is identical for all geometries for a given covering factor. The efficiency, xFe Kα, can then be found from equation [\ref=eqn:thinlimit] for any covering factor. The column density that is relevant for a given geometry is the average over all incident rays from the X-ray source, over all lines-of-sight that intercept the reprocessing structure. In terms of achieving the highest Fe Kα line efficiency, there is a trade-off with the solid angle subtended by the structure at the X-ray source, or covering factor. Larger solid angles obviously intercept more continuum photons to produce more Fe Kα line photons, but if the solid angle becomes too large, the escape of Fe Kα line photons could be impeded (e.g. see discussion in Ikeda et al. 2009). The optimum opening angle for the maximum Fe Kα line efficiency depends on the geometry and the observer's line-of-sight to the reprocessor. The maximum Fe Kα line efficiency will always be achieved for lines of sight that are unobscured. For the toroidal geometry of MY09, a maximum efficiency, ~  2.8%, is achieved for a covering factor of ~  0.8 - 0.9 for NH  ~  8  ×  1023 cm- 2 (and a face-on orientation), before the medium becomes Compton-thick.

The MY09 Monte Carlo code is adaptable for different geometries and we have used it to compare the Fe Kα line efficiency obtained from a toroidal geometry with the case of a centrally-illuminated, fully-covering sphere, and an externally-illuminated sphere. For the former, we found that xFe Kα has a broad peak as a function of (radial) NH, in the region ~  3 - 5  ×  1023 cm- 2, achieving a maximum value of ~  1.6%. In the case of the externally-illuminated sphere, we assumed a parallel beam incident on one side of the sphere and calculated xFe Kα as a function of the angle between the escaping line photons and the incident beam. In a clumpy medium the escaping line radiation would then consist of an appropriate angle-averaged spectrum over a distribution of such "blobs" (e.g. see also Nandra & George 1994; Miller, Turner, & Reeves, 2009 for discussion of such scenarios). The appropriate mean column density, N̄H, for an externally-illuminated sphere is 2 / 3 of the equatorial column density. We find that for an individual blob, not surprisingly, the maximum Fe Kα line efficiency, ~  2.6%, is achieved for line photons escaping in a direction anti-parallel to the incident radiation, from the illuminated face, for N̄H  ~  8  ×  1023 cm- 2. For this column density, the maximum efficiency for Fe Kα line emission from the opposite face, parallel to the incident radiation is 2.1%, for N̄H  ~  6-7  ×  1023 cm- 2. The angle-averaged value of xFe Kα (over 0-π) peaks at 2.2% for N̄H  ~  5-6  ×  1023 cm- 2 In addition to the angular averaging, for a clumpy medium one must account for the volume filling factor and covering factor of such blobs, and for interaction of line photons with multiple clouds. These effects can decrease the maximum Fe Kα line efficiency, and in fact, as the covering factor and filling factor tend towards unity, xFe Kα has to tend to the value for a centrally-illuminated sphere, or ~  1.6%. For any reprocessor geometry, the general behavior of xFe Kα as a function of mean column density is the same. That is, a rise to a maximum, followed by a decline that is steeper the more heavily obscured the line of sight is. The column density for which the maximum is achieved will be in the range ~  3 - 8  ×  1023 cm- 2, with the largest values of N̄H and xFe Kα at the maximum corresponding to unobscured (pure reflection) lines of sight. However, none of the geometries that we have considered here (for cosmic abundances and neutral matter) give a value of xFe Kα greater than ~  3% (for Γ = 1.9), for any covering factor, column density, or line of sight.

Our results also emphasize that the Fe Kα emission line cannot be trivially used as a proxy for the intrinsic continuum luminosity in obscured AGN. It has been postulated that since the Fe Kα line luminosity samples the intrinsic continuum over a large fraction of the sky, as seen from the X-ray source, it might be a good indicator of the intrinsic continuum luminosity, given that the line-of-sight may not be representative of the column density for the bulk of the reprocessor. However, we have shown that the dependence of the luminosity of the Fe Kα line on the geometry, inclination angle, NH, and AFe is sufficiently complex that such a use of the Fe Kα line cannot be trivially implemented. In particular, as a function of NH, the Fe Kα line luminosity is double-valued. However, we can obtain a lower limit on the intrinsic luminosity. We have shown that regardless of geometry, inclination, and the column density of the reprocessor, for a given Γ and AFe, there is a maximum possible value for xFe Kα if one can be certain that the dominant species of Fe are Fe  xii or less. We can measure Γ, and there may be independent constraints on AFe. Therefore, if we measure a flux or luminosity of the Fe Kα line, the lower bound on such a measurement implies a lower limit on the intrinsic continuum luminosity that corresponds to the maximum efficiency.

Application to absorption-dominated models for MCG -  6-30-15

We can apply our results to the case of the well-known Seyfert galaxy MCG -  6-30-15. This AGN has been the archetypal X-ray source for harboring a broad, relativistic Fe Kα line. However, Miller, Turner, & Reeves (2008) showed that absorption-dominated models that do not require a relativistically-broadened Fe Kα line are also consistent with the X-ray data. Reynolds et al. (2009) claimed that such absorption-dominated models over-predict the flux of the narrow Fe Kα emission-line at ~  6.4 keV and concluded that a finely-tuned model with a small covering factor is required. Here we show that this conclusion is invalid on the basis of simple physics.

MCG -  6-30-15 has a typical narrow Fe Kα line at 6.4 keV with a measured flux of 1.6+ 1.1- 0.9  ×  10- 5 photons cm- 2 s- 1 (Yaqoob & Padmanabhan 2004). The time-averaged 2-10 keV flux from a very long ~  300 ks XMM-Newton observation (Fabian et al. 2002; Doviak et al. 2004) was ~  4.3  ×  10- 11 erg cm- 2 s- 1 (a value this is representative of historical behavior-see Markowitz et al. 2003), and Γ = 1.9 is typical. Therefore, we obtain a photon flux above the Fe K edge of 2.8  ×  10- 3 photons cm- 2 s- 1. Using our general result of a maximum Fe Kα line efficiency of ~  3% we get an Fe Kα line flux of 8.5  ×  10- 5 photons cm- 2 s- 1. Thus, no matter what distribution of cold/neutral matter that we place around the X-ray source in MCG -  6-30-15, regardless of column density, covering factor, or geometry, we cannot obtain an Fe Kα line flux much greater than 8.5  ×  10- 5 photons cm- 2 s- 1. Miller et al. (2009) presented similar conclusions for the narrow Fe Kα line flux in MCG -  6-30-15. This is a very generous upper limit because it requires optimal values for the column density and covering factor, and a line-of-sight that does not intercept the line emitter. Obviously, a large column density in the line-of-sight will reduce the predicted Fe Kα line flux. For example, for NH = 2  ×  1024 cm- 2, and a spherical geometry with a covering factor of 0.5, the predicted Fe Kα line flux is very small, just ~  4  ×  10- 6 photons cm- 2 s- 1. A similar value is obtained from the MY09 edge-on toroidal X-ray reprocessor model (see Fig. 2). Reynolds et al. (2009) obtained estimates of the Fe Kα line flux in MCG -  6-30-15 based on a simple cold, cosmic abundance absorber with NH  =  2  ×  1024 cm- 2. However, they used an optically-thin approximation for a manifestly optically-thick scenario. Specifically, they used a column density that is one hundred times higher than the value for which that approximation begins to breaks down (see Fig. 2), and consequently obtained an effective efficiency that is unphysical. Reynolds et al. (2009) therefore obtained a very high Fe Kα line flux (2.54  ×  10- 4 photons cm- 2 s- 1) that is nearly two orders of magnitude higher than that expected for their assumed column density and covering factor (NH = 2  ×  1024 cm- 2 and 0.35 respectively). They also gained a factor of ~  2 in the Fe Kα line flux by assuming that all of the continuum photons absorbed above the Fe K edge are absorbed by the Fe K shell, whereas in fact the true fraction is 0.51-0.61 (see §[\ref=lineflux]).

Summary

The Fe Kα emission-line flux or luminosity is nontrivial to calculate because the optically-thin approximation (with respect to absorption and scattering in the ~  6-7 keV band) breaks down for column densities as small as ~  2  ×  1022 cm- 2. Inappropriate use of the optically-thin approximation can lead to estimates of the line flux that are orders of magnitude too large. We have given a prescription for estimating the Fe Kα line flux in the case of neutral matter with cosmic abundances, for some very general situations.

We have characterized the line flux in terms of a dimensionless efficiency, xFe Kα, defined as the ratio of the flux in the line to that in the incident continuum above the Fe K absorption edge threshold energy. We refer to values of xFe Kα that pertain to a power-law slope of the incident X-ray continuum of Γ = 1.9 but have given a simple prescription for scaling xFe Kα to other values of Γ in the range 1.5-2.5. The maximum value of xFe Kα depends on the geometry, covering factor, and orientation, and is always obtained for lines of sight to the X-ray reprocessor that are unobscured. In general, this maximum is achieved before the structure becomes Compton-thick, for mean column densities in the range ~  3 - 8  ×  1023 cm- 2. For the toroidal geometry of MY09 the maximum Fe Kα line efficiency is attained for nearly full covering (  ~  0.9), before the medium becomes Compton-thick, and is ~  2.8%. This can be compared with the maximum value of xFe Kα for a uniform, centrally-illuminated sphere of ~  1.6%. A clumpy distribution of matter can give somewhat higher Fe Kα line efficiencies, of the order of 2%.

Regardless of geometry and covering factor, for cosmic abundances and incident continua with a power-law photon index of 1.9 or less, none of the geometries considered yields an Fe Kα line efficiency greater than ~  3%. Steeper incident continua can give a higher efficiency but we find that for Γ = 2.5 it is only a factor of ~  1.43 higher. X-ray sources that are Compton-thick in the line of sight can have Fe Kα line efficiencies that are an order of magnitude or more smaller than the maximum for a given geometry. For example the MY09 toroidal geometry viewed edge-on has xFe Kα <  0.2%, and xFe Kα <  0.02% for column densities of 2  ×  1024 cm- 2 and 1025 cm- 2 respectively. We have applied our results to the Seyfert galaxy MCG -  6-30-15 to show that absorption-dominated models for the broad, relativistic Fe Kα emission line do not over-predict the flux of the narrow Fe Kα line for any column density or covering factor. Recent claims to the contrary by Reynolds et al. (2009) are based on an invalid treatment of the problem. Our results also emphasize the fact that the absolute luminosity of the Fe Kα emission line in obscured astrophysical sources cannot be used as a proxy for the intrinsic continuum luminosity in a trivial way. Using both the Fe Kα line flux and EW does provide additional constraints but the intrinsic continuum luminosity may still be uncertain because of the complex dependencies upon Fe abundance, geometry, covering factor, and system orientation.

The authors thank Chris Done for carefully reviewing the manuscript and for helpful suggestions. Partial support from NASA grants NNG04GB78A (KM, TY) and NNX09AD01G (TY) is gratefully acknowledged. TJT acknowledges support from NASA grant NNX08AJ41G.