OLD GALAXIES AT HIGH REDSHIFT

Background: locating passively evolving galaxies at high z

The recent discovery of a substantial population of star-forming galaxies at (3.0  <  z  <  3.5) has revolutionised the study of radio quiet galaxies at high redshift, as evidenced by a number of contributions at this meeting2. However a selection method which depends on a Lyman continuum break superimposed on an otherwise blue far-UV continuum can shed little light on the evolutionary state of the most passively evolving systems which exist at a given epoch. This is unfortunate since, given the ease with which a relatively small starburst can mask the true properties of an underlying galaxy, it is the reddest/most-passive systems at any redshift which are of greatest interest for constraining the first epoch of galaxy formation and indeed the age of the Universe.

Radio-based selection has long provided an alternative and effective method of locating high redshift galaxies which, at least in principle, should not be so directly biassed towards star-forming sources. Indeed, if anything it should be biassed towards the precursors of old elliptical galaxies since at low-redshifts it is well-established that the hosts of powerful radio sources are elliptical galaxies with well-evolved stellar populations. Despite this, identification of high-redshift objects on the basis of extreme radio power has also yielded optically active objects with the majority of high-redshift radio galaxies studied to date displaying complex elongated optical/UV morphologies, relatively blue optical-ultraviolet continuum colours, and strong emission lines3. However, the fact that the optical-ultraviolet properties of high-redshift radio galaxies are known to correlate with radio power4 suggests that any radio-based search for 'normal' elliptical galaxies at high redshift should be confined to milli-Jansky flux levels. Accordingly, over the past few years we have investigated the properties of weak radio galaxies with S1.4GHz  >  1 mJy from the Leiden Berkeley Deep Survey, and have isolated a sample of 10 extremely red objects that have R - K  >  5 and zest  >  1 for intensive spectroscopic study.

Keck Spectroscopy

While a red R - K colour can be taken as indicative of an old stellar population, deep optical spectroscopy is vital for the reliable dating of these objects for four reasons. First, a spectroscopic redshift is required. Second, it is necessary to show that the red colour of the object arises from a lack of young stars rather than, for example, from a dust-reddened active nucleus. Third, the shape of the rest-frame ultraviolet spectrum of a galaxy is extremely sensitive to the age of the stellar population5. Fourth, for high-redshift galaxies it should be possible to use evolutionary synthesis models to derive relatively robust age estimates from ultra-violet SEDs because, for the potential age range of interest (i.e. age <  8 Gyr for z  >  1) the ultraviolet SED is completely dominated by stars near the main-sequence turnoff point on the HR diagram6 (i.e. disagreements over, for example, the strength and colour of the AGB or HB are unimportant).

We have now obtained deep optical spectra of two red mJy radio galaxies using LRIS on the Keck telescope. Our redshift determination and spectral dating of the first of these (53W091; z  =  1.552) have been published1 and will be described in more detail elsewhere7. In brief, the ultraviolet SED of this source is, as illustrated in Figure 1, very similar to those of low-redshift ellipticals such as M32, and essentially identical to that of an F6V star. Both these comparisons suggest an age of ≃3.5 Gyr, a result confirmed by spectral synthesis modelling. We have recently (June 1996) obtained a deep LRIS spectrum of a second red mJy radio galaxy, 53W069. This object also lies at z≃1.5 (z  =  1.432) and has an ultraviolet SED which is in fact slightly redder, indicating an age of ≃4.5 Gyr8.

Galaxy ages from ultraviolet spectral breaks

While the large number of stellar absorption features detected in the spectra of both these objects proves that their UV light is dominated by stars, dating on the basis of the overall shape of their UV SED is susceptible to distortion either by dust reddening or by low-level direct/indirect AGN contamination. However the strengths of the spectral breaks at 2640Å and 2900Å  being relatively immune from such complications should yield more robust age estimates. Certainly the strength of these breaks in the IUE spectra of stars is well studied9, and despite misgivings over the understanding of the relevant opacities, evolutionary synthesis models based on both observed and theoretical stellar spectra do indeed seem to produce reasonably consistent results from both breaks. As indicated in Table 1, this analysis indicates that in both galaxies ≃5 Gyr has elapsed since the last era of significant star-formation activity.

The most attractive way to reconcile an Einstein-de Sitter Universe with such large ages at z≃1.5 is to assume that the strong breaks in both 53W069 and 53W091 are due to high metallicity rather than age. However, the metallicity dependence of these breaks does not appear to be strong1,9, and in any case the mean metallicities of comparably massive giant ellipticals at low redshift are at most only mildly super-solar when averaged out to r≃re (≃0.5 arcsec at z≃1.5 and thus within the LRIS slit)10. Taken at face value an age >  5 Gyr at z≃1.5 implies Ω0  <  0.2 for H0  >  55kms -  1Mpc -  1 unless Λ  >  0.

Acknowledgments

I gratefully acknowledge my collaborators in this work: John Peacock, Hy Spinrad, Arjun Dey, Rogier Windhorst, Raul Jimenez and Daniel Stern.

References