Lie-Algebraic Characterization

of 2D (Super-)Integrable Models

F. Toppan

Dipartimento di Fisica

Università di Padova

Via Marzolo 8, I-35131 Padova

E-Mail: toppan@mvxpd5.pd.infn.it

Talk given in memory of Prof. D.V. Volkov

Abstract

It is pointed out that affine Lie algebras appear to be the natural mathematical structure underlying the notion of integrability for two-dimensional systems. Their role in the construction and classification of 2D integrable systems is discussed. The supersymmetric case will be particularly enphasized. The fundamental examples will be outlined.

The integrable hierarchies of differential equations in 1 + 1 dimensions have been widely studied in the last several years both in the physical and in the mathematical literature. In the time there has been an ever-growing evidence that their relevance should not be confined in the realm of pure mathematics, but rather their beautiful mathematical structures show themselves naturally when investigating physical problems.

It deserves being mentioned that 2-dimensional integrable systems appear in two different (neverthless related) ways: on one hand we have the non-relativistic integrable equations in 1 space and 1 time dimension. The basic example for these systems is the celebrated KdV equation and the systems of this kind will be referred as of KdV-type.

On the other hand the second big class of integrable systems is provided by the relativistic ones in two dimensions, that is the so-called Toda field theories, whose fundamental example is the even more celebrated Liouville equation.

As discussed later, both such classes are obtainable from one and the same mathematical construction, presenting the affine Lie-algebras as fundamental ingredient.

Before going ahead let us just mention some physical applications of both classes of theories, which motivated the interest of physicists in looking at them. At first the Liouville theory appeared in the Polyakov's geometrical attempt in quantizing the bosonic string off-criticality [\cite=pol]. More recently integrable systems of KdV-type were found associated to physical problems when it was realized they furnished the partition functions of the two-dimensional discretized gravity in the matrix-models approach (see [\cite=dif] for a review). Quite new and rather unexpectedly integrable hierarchies appear even associated to 4-dimensional field theories as a sort of an underlying integrable structure of N = 2 SuperYang-Mills theories in the Seiberg-Witten framework [\cite=sw].

Another way of associating Liouville theory to strings is a rather different one. It is based on the so-called geometrical approach, greatly developed by the Kharkov's group, to (classical) strings. In this approach the solution for the dynamical problem of a string moving on a 2 + 1 flat-target is reduced to the solution of the Liouville equation[\cite=omn]. It is worth to mention this point here because it is related to Prof. D.V. Volkov's last work. In fact in [\cite=vol] it was constructed the geometrical approach for a Green-Schwarz superstring moving in a flat supersymmetric target of 2 + 1 dimensions. Surprisingly, it was found that the equations of motions can now be reduced to a supersymmetrized version of the Liouville equation, but not the standard one. This result was the basic motivation for understanding the situation from purely Lie-algebraic data, work done in collaboration with D. Sorokin [\cite=st1] and [\cite=st2] which will be reported later.

Let us come back now to the mathematical structure of integrable systems. The main difference between KdV-type hierarchies and Toda-type hierarchies is due to the fact that the former ones are recovered from a single copy of affine algebras, while the latter from two separated copies corresponding to the chiral and antichiral sectors respectively. Let us denote as J the currents valued on a given simple Lie algebra G and generating an affine Lie algebra [formula].

WZNZ models have dynamics expressed by group-manifold elements G, while the currents are defined as J = ∂G  ·  G- 1 and [formula] (the antichiral one) respectively and satisfy free-equations. Neverthless in both cases, non-trivial equations are obtained by imposing constraints on the affine currents J (and [formula] in the second case). Such constraints arise in two different ways, either as hamiltonian constraint, or as coset constraints. The first case correspond to the Dirac's theory of constraints, while the latter simply means that the dynamical quantities should have vanishing Poisson brackets with respect to some Kac-Moody subalgebra.

In the basic example of sl(2) (or A1 algebra) these two constructions (denoted as a) and b)) lead respectively to (for non-relativistic, type-1 systems, and relativistic, type-2 systems) to: 1a) KdV equation; 1b) NLS equation; 2a) Liouville equation; 2b) Witten's 2D's black hole.

The arising of integrable hierarchies from constrained affine Lie algebras is particularly important because it provides the tools towards a classification of all hierarchies.

Let us now discuss the case of supersymmetric extensions of bosonic hierarchies. The interest in such extensions should not be thought being limited to the super-physics program (and more specifically to superstrings), instead a wider range of applications arises. For instance it is well-known that new bosonic hierarchies can arise when only the bosonic (or more generally the non-supersymmetric sector) of theories based on supergroups and superalgebras is considered. One of the main sources of interest in investigating supersymmetries morever coincide with large N-supersymmetric extensions, because it correspond to a sort of "unification" or "grandunification" of known hierarchies. It happens indeed that seemingly unrelated bosonic or lower supersymmetric (N = 1,2) hierarchies turn out to be a different manifestation of a single "unifying" large-N supersymmetric hierarchy.

Until recently it was commonly believed that supersymmetric hierarchies could be produced only from affinization of a particular kind of superalgebras. It must be explained that superalgebras, just as ordinary algebras, can be expressed through their Dynkin's diagrams which refer to their simple roots. However, since superalgebras admit two kinds of generators, even and odd, the simple roots could be either fermionic or bosonic. It was thought that only the special class of superalgebras admitting purely fermionic simple roots could provide supersymmetric integrable models. The reason for that was based on an argument related to the Drinfeld-Sokolov approach to integrable systems (based on simple roots). Since the basic derivative operator for supersymmetric theory is fermionic it was thought that the only consistent way to construct a fermionic matrix-Lax pair implied the use of the fermonic simple roots. It appeared at first as a surprise in [\cite=bd] that the supersymmetric version of the Non-Linear-Schrödinger equation admits a Lax pair based on sl(2) instead of osp(1|2) as expected. In [\cite=top] it was shown that such supersymmetric equation admits a natural interpretation in terms of a coset construction based on the supersymmetric affinization of [formula] (the tower of hamiltonian densities has vanishing Poisson brackets w.r.t. the supersymmetric û(1) subalgebra).

At this stage it was clear that, at least for coset construction, it was perfectly acceptable to recover supersymmetric integrable models from any bosonic or super Lie algebra.

More recently, in collaboration with D. Sorokin [\cite=st1] and [\cite=st2], we have shown how it is possible to bypass the requirement of purely fermionic Dynkin's diagram-type supealgebras even in the case of hamiltonian constraint (the case a) in the previous classification). For lack of space I cannot describe here our method and I refer to the cited papers for details. Let me just point out that the resulting hierarchies (in the Toda-type construction) are superconformally invariant, with the supersymmetry realized non-linearly and spontaneously broken. Such kind of systems give us automatically a non-standard Sugawara realization of the superconformal stress-energy tensor which involves fermionic b - c systems of weight [formula]. The simplest example of this kind is obtained in terms of the sl(2) algebra. It corresponds to the non-standard superLiouville equation found in [\cite=vol] expressing the dynamics of a Green-Schwarz superstring on a 2 + 1 Minkowski flat target.

In the last part of my talk I wish to introduce some new results, found in collaboration with E. Ivanov and S. Krivonos, concerning the large-N supersymmetric extension of integrable hierarchies (and their relation to affine algebras) [\cite=ikt]. A bosonic algebra such as [formula] turns out to be the basic structure underlying the N = 4 KdV hierarchy.

Indeed the following features hold. Algebras admitting quaternionic structure have been classified [\cite=cla]. They are thought to be related to N = 4 theories. Indeed the simplest non-trivial case ([formula], the abelian [formula] should be ruled out for our purposes) is such that their supersymmetric affinization admits a global N = 4 structure (realized by non-linear transformations). Moreover an infinite number of N = 4 hamiltonians in involution associated to the above superaffine algebra as Poisson bracket structure, can be found. The resulting integrable hierarchy can be denoted as N = 4 NLS-mKdV hierarchy because different constraints compatible with the equations of motion lead respectively to the N = 2 mKdV and to the N = 2 NLS equation.

The N = 4 hierarchy is not only supersymmetric but even N = 4 superconformal because the Sugawara construction applied to the superaffine [formula] leads to a closed algebraic structure, where the N = 4 transformations are linearized, which corresponds to the so-called minimal N = 4 version of the SuperConformal Algebra (expressed in terms of three bosonic spin 1 N = 2 superfields, one bosonic, one chiral and one antichiral). With respect to the generators of the N = 4 SCA the equations of motions are closed and coincide with the equations of the N = 4 KdV hierarchy [\cite=kdv].

Therefore even large-N supersymmetric hierarchies find an interpretation in terms of (super-)affine Lie algebras. This result is particularly important because it paves the way towards an understanding and a Lie-algebraic classification of all N = 4 hierarchies.

Acknowledgements:

I wish to express my gratitude to the organizers of the conference in memory of Prof. D.V. Volkov for their kind invitation to give a talk.