-27pt

RU-97-38

Renormalizing Recitation Grades Joel Shapiro Department of Physics and Astronomy Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08855-0849 May 20, 1997

Abstract

I discuss issue of how to adjust recitation grades given by different instructors in a large course, taking into account and correcting for differences in standards among the instructors, while preserving the effects of differences in average student performance among the recitation sections.

Introductory physics in large universities is dominantly taught in large courses which combine lectures with recitation sections. The course content and policy is set by one person who is the course leader, but there are a number of people responsible for the recitation sections. The students receive grades based primarily but not entirely on examinations. These are graded in a manner so that variations in standards among the recitation instructors do not unfairly affect some students in comparison to others.

That component of the grade which is based on recitation work, however, cannot easily be assigned in a way that is fair to all students. Quizzes are of necessity different, and graded by people with widely differing standards. Even if the recitation grade is only a small part of the total, so that the effect of these differences on a student's total grade is not very significant, nonetheless the effect on the morale of students is quite significant. They are acutely aware of discrepancies in standards. This paper addresses the issue of how to deal with this problem so that both the students and instructors are confident that grades are being fairly assigned. I call this the problem of renormalizing recitation grades.

Before embarking on a convoluted mechanism for renormalizing the grades, we need to be convinced that the perception of unfairness is the result of a real problem. Instructors have very differing grading standards, even after they have been asked to grade to a certain standard. For example, in the course I have recently administered, Prof. A had two sections with an average exam grade of 49, while Prof. B had four sections with an average exam grade of 48. Nonetheless the average recitation for Prof. A was 65, while that of Prof. B was 79. The students were very aware of this non-negligible difference and were quite upset, until I told them that we knew how to correct for these differences, and those with the tougher instructor would not be unfairly graded in the end. Unfortunately, I was stretching the truth -- at the time, we did not really have such a scheme in place. This is my attempt at developing one.

The problem is also non-trivial. We could just add 14 points to each of Prof. A's students, but no doubt this would push some of his students over 100, which would be noticeable and unfair to the best students in Prof. B's classes, as they would have no chance to get over 100. This simple approach also ignores any inherent differences in the average ability of students among different sections. Most of us who have been involved in such courses realize there are significant variations in the average ability among the sections. For example, Prof. C in my course had one section with an exam average of 44% and another with an average of 51%, a very significant difference, especially considering that these were multiple choice exams where random guessing alone provided 20%.

Since the beginning of the use of recitation sections and computerized exams in our Department nearly twenty years ago, the necessity of dealing with this problem has been recognized. But I believe the issues have not been well understood, much less solved, before now.

First, I would like to make clear that there are two essentially independent issues here, once we agree to do some renormalization. Having decided to set a goal for the average renormalized recitation grades for each section, the first issue is how to determine that goal. The other problem is what function f to apply to the raw recitation grades xi to get the new recitation grades f(xi) which will have an average which achieves the goal. Neither has been done well in our Department in the past.

Determining the Goal

As stated above, recitation sections are far from random samplings from the total class ensemble. The real reasons are not known to me, but plenty of possible causes abound, in particular conflict with other courses. For example, a recitation section that meets at the same time as an honors calculus course might well have students of lower average ability than the class as a whole.

In our Department, some course leaders have chosen to ignore such differences in the sections and to normalize recitation grades by bringing each section to the same predetermined average. Those who have tried to make individual renormalization goals for each section have, to my knowledge, all used the assumption that the recitation grade average should be proportional to the exam averages. Thus the goal gr is given by [formula] where the averages of exam scores for the recitation section 〈ei〉r and for the whole class 〈ei〉c are used to scale the overall class goal G.

situation: Suppose a good section has an exam average of 70% in a course where the overall average is 55%. Suppose the overall recitation grade goal is 80%. This gives a goal for the average recitation grade in this section of 102%. Clearly wrong!

The renormalization function

The other issue, also not trivial, is this: Given a set of raw recitation scores {xi} for a section and a goal g that we wish the average of the renormalized scores to be, how do we find a suitable function f for which 〈f(xi)〉  =  g. Unfortunately, f needs to have some other suitable properties

One should not be too quick to think he has a solution to this problem. Clearly a simple scaling of the grades to adjust the average to the goal, f(x)  =  gx / 〈xi〉, does not meet requirement 2. A piecewise linear fit, say with one segment from (0,0) to some intermediate point and another from that point to (100,100), can be made to have the right average, but one must remember that the average of the function is not the function applied to the average, and the intermediate point is not determined by only g and 〈xi〉. A quadratic fit is easily calculable; f(x) = (1 - 100a)x  +  ax2 satisfies (1) and (2) automatically. Getting the right average is simple:

The method which has been in use in our Department for many years is this: The average score 〈xi〉 is mapped to g, and this point is connected by straight lines to (0,0) and (100,100). Clearly, as long as g is sensible, g∈(0,100), this function satisfies (1-3), but unfortunately it doesn't satisfy the original criterion:

Every semester, in the brief interval between the final exam being given and the due date for the receipt of grades by the registrar, a panic ensues when some new recitation instructor discovers that the computer does not do what she expects it to do. There then ensues a discussion of whether the fact that this method undercorrects the section grades compensates the fact that the goal is overly dependent on the section exam average. The answer is "not in general", and in fact the two faults can work in the same direction rather than cancel.

One of our faculty came up with an mathematically elegant renormalization function which satisfies requirements (1-3) and sets and achieves a goal for the average of the logarithm of the grades, which at first blush seems as sensible a criterion as a goal for the average grade. Considering the grades on the domain

[formula]

, he noted that scaling the logarithms automatically kept the endpoints fixed, and therefore

[formula]

provides a renormalization function, easily calculable and simple to implement.

While this solution is mathematically elegant, I think it would be a very poor choice to use. The trouble with this method is that it gives the greatest weight in adjusting the class average to the worst students -- in its pure form this method would give almost everyone in a class a perfect score if one student got a zero. We could avoid this by putting in cutoffs on who got included in the average, but still the weakest students included are determining the renormalization of everyone. And the elegance is lost if we apply it only to students in some subdomain. I don't believe this is what we want.

So what can we do?

This paper makes suggestions for how each of these problems can be solved. Neither is very simple, but each can be readily implemented by computer. I believe my method for determining the goal for each section has a "rightness" about it, although I can't give a set of assumptions under which it is "correct". The method of determining the renormalization function is somewhat arbitrary, but it should (well, under reasonable conditions, at least) satisfy (0-3), and also weigh students fairly evenly, emphasizing those in the middle.

Determining the goal

factors, were it not for the differences in instructors. The function r(n), the "correct" distribution of recitation grades, is undetermined, but I think its exact form is not terribly important -- the crucial issue here is fairness, and as long as the distribution has a reasonable spread, it doesn't much matter where its mean is, because that will just affect where grade dividing lines are set. I think we should use the actual raw distribution of the full class as our function r(n).

The above discussion applies best if we restrict our attention to students who have taken all exams and who have attended some reasonable minimal number of recitation sections. Only those students are used to determine the functions r(n) and E(n), and the section average goals, and thus the renormalization functions for each section.

Thus I suggest taking as the goal for section S the average

[formula]

where nS is the number of qualified students in section S, with the sum only over the qualified students. The minimum number of recitation grades required for qualification can be specified by the course leader. Of course all students will have their grades calculated using the renormalization function for their section, whether or not they were included in determining the function.

The Renormalization Function

The renormalization function needs to be a monotone function such as the possibilities shown above. It ought to keep close grades close and large differences large, so the slope ought to stay as close to 1 as possible, and nonetheless distribute the required modification to the sum of the grades reasonably uniformly. I see no justification for requiring continuity of the derivative f', and therefore no objection to using a piecewise linear function.

It would be straightforward to use two straight line segments, perhaps joining at the average raw grade for the section. The student at the break point would be moved further than g, because other students will be moved less, and thus the average will be moved by less than the student who had the average raw grade. If we use three line segments, which I recommend, this will still be true but the maximum movement required is less.

If f(x) is given by three continuous line segments, the parameters are the positions, x and f(x), of each of the two breaks. Four parameters are a lot to fit, and to make things easier I fix the break points in the domain d1 and d2 to subdivide the section into three approximately equal numbers of students. This leaves two parameters, f(d1) and f(d2), constrained by the requirement that the average come out right. This is one linear condition on the two parameters, with coefficients given in terms of the goal g, the numbers nL, nM, nR in the left, middle and right thirds of the class, and the sums [formula], sM and sR of the raw grades in each of these subsets. These are all easy to accumulate.

We still require one further condition to specify the parameters, which is set by minimizing some measure of how badly the renormalization is distorting the recitation grades. I have considered and implemented two different measures. The simpler, ("minimax") minimizes the maximum change, in absolute value, in a student's grade. This requires the slope of the middle line segment to be 1, and is straightforward to implement. I also considered minimizing the deviation of the slopes from 1, because two students who got nearly the same raw grade should not get very different renormalized grades, or vice-versa. I measured the "badness" by the sum, over the three segments, of the square of the sum of the slope and its reciprocal. This treats f and f- 1 on the same footing, declaring either a zero or infinite slope to be infinitely bad. Both methods work well and fairly easily, though the second requires a numerical root finder to find the minimum. I call this the "slope" method. Each method will lower the grades of some students, the difference perhaps best illustrated by the effect in one section with inflated grades in my course. The minimax method kept the maximum change to 7 points, but lowered a 92 to an 85, nearly doubling the points lost. The slope method lowered one student by more, 10 points, but his grade was a 76 lowered to a 66, perhaps less dramatic, while the student with a 92 was lowered only to an 87. An even more extreme example is provided by a test run halfway through the current term (see below), in which the minimax method lowered grades by 16%, including dropping a 98% to a 82%, while the slope method dropped the 98% to 96% but dropped a 90% to 68%. I find the slope method results less troublesome, but others might disagree.

Results

Both methods were used in a third term Engineering class with 440 students and 15 sections taught by five recitation instructors, in the fall of 1996, with the final grades utilizing the minimax method. In the spring of 1997, in the fourth term of that sequence, with 405 students in 13 recitation sections, the slope method was used to determine the final grades. None of the instructors in either semester complained of the results, which looked as reasonable as could be expected given the widely divergent grading of my recitation instructors. Examples from last fall are shown in Figure 4.

algebra,It was partially successful in doing so. and also if the minimization routine used by the slope method jumps over the infinite badness point when a slope goes to zero. I believe such problems are not likely to arise in practice, and this did not happen in any of sections in my course.

-9000 Summary

Thus we now have available methods for ensuring that the recitation grades assigned to students can be assigned fairly, taking account of different average abilities among the sections while eliminating the effects of different grading standards among the instructors. Details of the method can be obtained from the author.

Acknowledgements

I wish to thank Frank Zimmermann for several interesting discussions, which reemphasized for me the need to think out a solution to this problem. These conversations also made clear that the problem was nontrivial, not only to solve but, even more so, to state. I also thank Juliet Shaffer for reading this document and making several helpful suggestions for clarifying the presentation.