=

1.25in .125in .25in

Search for Southern-Hemisphere Giant Radio Galaxies with SALT

Introduction

Radio galaxies (RGs) represent the largest single objects in the Universe. Powered by an active galactic nucleus (AGN) jets emerge from the central engine, which very likely is a super-massive black hole accreting matter surrounding it. There is a huge range of linear extent of the RGs: from less than 102 pc - Gigahertz-Peaked Spectrum (GPS), through 102 - 104 pc - Compact Steep Spectrum (CSS), 104 - 106 pc - normal-size sources, up to greater than 1 Mpc - Giant Radio Galaxies (GRG). The three largest GRGs, recognized up to now, are shown in Fig. 1.

Although giant-size radio sources are very rare among RGs, from many years they have been of a special interest for several reasons. Their very large angular size on the sky give an excellent opportunity for the study of radio source physics. They are also very useful to study the density and evolution of the intergalactic and intracluster environment. One of the key issues of the current research is attempt to trace an individual evolution of RGs. Is there a single evolutionary scheme governing the linear extent of radio sources, or do small and large sources evolve in a different way? To answer this question, in a number of papers, both theoretical and observational, attempts were undertaken to recognize factors which may differentiate giants from normal-size sources. It seems that there is no a single factor responsible for the size of classical radio sources; the large size of GRGs probably results from a combination of different factors like: age of a source, jet power, density of environment, etc. Still very limited number of well studied GRGs is a reason of that uncertainty. Therefore the phenomenon of GRG is still open for a further research.

Search for New Giants

During the IAU Symposium No. 199 (December 1999) Machalski & Jamrozy (2002) presented an evidence that only a very small fraction of expected faint GRGs of Fanaroff-Riley (1974) type II (FRII) was detected at that time. In order to find those missed giant sources we inspected the radio maps available from the large radio surveys: NVSS (Condon et al., 1998) and the first part of FIRST (Becker et al., 1995). The maps of these surveys, made with two different angular resolution (45[formula] and 5[formula], respectively) at the same observing frequency of 1.4 GHz, allowed (i) an effective removal of confusing sources, (ii) a reliable determination of morphological type of the giant candidate, and (iii) a detection of the compact radio core necessary for the proper identification of the source with its parent optical object. As the result we selected a sample of 36 GRG candidates (cf. Machalski et al., 2001). In order to identify their host galaxy, to determine its distance and other physical properties, we have carried out several radio and optical observations of the sample sources. In particular, we already made optical spectroscopy and got redshift for 17 out of 36 galaxies (spectroscopic redshifts of 5 sample galaxies were available prior our research). Out of 22 galaxies, 19 host giant radio sources. In the meantime, similar efforts have been undertaken by Schoenmakers et al. (2001) and Lara et al. (2001). Owing to the above studies, the statistics of giant radio galaxies is enlarged. The numbers of FRII-type GRGs, expected from our population analysis (Machalski & Jamrozy 2002), are recalled in Table 1 and compared with the observed numbers. The observed numbers denoted by an asterisk refer to the data available in 1999, while other are from the beginning of the year 2003.

Two examples of GRGs from our sample are shown in Fig. 2. J1343+3758 with the linear size of 3.14 Mpc has appeared to be the third largest source in the universe (Machalski & Jamrozy 2000), while J1604+3438 represents a very rare type of AGN - a so-called double-double RG (cf. Schoenmakers et al. 2000) which shows two pairs of lobes likely originating from an old and a new cycle of activity. Low-resolution optical spectra of host galaxies of these two giant radio sources are shown in Fig. 3. Some of the above data are used to constrain the existing analytical models of a dynamical evolution of FRII-type radio sources (Machalski et al. 2003; Chyy et al. 2003).

Why Southern Hemisphere

Our investigations of the new giant radio sources are in progress. However, we would like to extend them on GRGs on the southern sky. There are several scientific reasons for such a project, and the main of them are:

All of the recent systematic search for new giants (Lara et al. 2001, Machalski et al. 2001, Schoenmakers et al. 2001) were performed on the northern sky. Furthermore, only about 17% of the presently known GRGs have negative declinations, and gross of them are high flux density (S > 0.5 Jy) nearby objects. Therefore, one can expect a large number of undetected yet GRGs on the southern hemisphere very useful for a further enlargement of their still unsatisfactory statistics.

The development of astronomical high-technology facilities i.e. the existing and planned large optical telescopes on the South (VLT, SALT) is very rapid. Therefore, it should be easy to attain the redshift of new GRG hosting galaxies which is the crucial observational parameter for determination of all physical parameters of the radio sources like their distance, projected linear size, volume of their lobes or cocoon, luminosity, etc. The above needs low-resolution spectroscopic observations of usually faint optical counterparts (which in many cases have very low apparent magnitudes [formula]) in a reasonably short time.

There is a high probability that the planned powerful radio interferometer - the Square Kilometer Area (SKA) will be located in the South (there are two southern site candidates for its possible location, i.e. Australia or South Africa). It would give the opportunity to detect and study low surface-brightness GRGs with a very high angular resolution and sensitivity in the future. This, in turn, would allow to recognize a very last stage of the dynamical evolution of classical double radio galaxies and learn a typical lifetime and end of that physical process.