Direct γ and γ-jet measurement capability of ATLAS for Pb+Pb collisions

Introduction

Direct photons produced in Pb+Pb collisions can be divided into prompt photons produced in hard processes in the initial collision, and non-prompt photons produced by jet fragmentation, in-medium gluon conversion and medium-induced bremsstrahlung. Prompt processes such as q + g  →  q + γ and q +   →  g + γ lead to final states with a high pT parton (gluon or quark) balanced by a prompt photon with roughly comparable pT [\cite=incnll]. They thus provide a calibrated parton inside of the medium, allowing a direct, quantitative measurement of the energy loss of partons in the medium and of the medium response.

ATLAS has a unique capability to study such processes because of the large-acceptance calorimeter with longitudinal and fine-transverse segmentation [\cite=ATLAScal]. In particular the first main layer of the calorimeter is read out in narrow transverse strips. This segmentation allows us to purify our sample of γ-jet events by rejecting jet-jet background. It further allows us to identify photons which are near or even inside of a jet, where isolation cuts cannot be used. This provides access to non-prompt photons from jet fragmentation, from in-medium gluon conversion and from the medium-induced bremsstrahlung.

Technique

The design of the ATLAS electromagnetic calorimeter is optimal for direct photon identification. The first layer of the electromagnetic calorimeter, which covers the full azimuth and |η| < 2.4, has very fine segmentation along the η direction (ranging from 0.003 to 0.006 units). This layer provides detailed information on the shower shape, which allows a direct separation of γ's, π0's, and η's on a particle-by-particle level. Deposited strip energy distributions as a function of eta relative to the cluster centroid for a typical single γ, single π0, and single η meson are shown in the upper panels of Fig. [\ref=fig:strip6]. Characteristically different shower profiles are seen. The energy of a single photon is concentrated across a few strips, with a single maximum in the center, while the showers for π0  →  γγ and η  →  γγ are distributed across more strips, often with two or more peaks. The broad shower profile for π0 and η reflects the overlap of showers for two or more decay photons. Even when the two peaks are not resolved, the multi-photon showers are measurably broader on a statistical basis. The lower panels of Fig. [\ref=fig:strip6] show the strip layer energy distributions surrounding the direction of single particles embedded in central Pb+Pb events. The γ, π0 and η in these panels are the same ones used in the upper panels. Despite the large background of low-energy particles produced in Pb+Pb events (dNch / dη = 2650 in this case), the shower shape for the embedded particle is almost unchanged by the background. Thus the strip layer allows the rejection of π0 and η clusters over a very broad energy range, and the performance for the background rejection and identification efficiency should not depend strongly on the event centrality.

Results

To distinguish direct photons from neutral hadrons, cuts have been developed based on the shower shape in the strip layer. These cuts reject those showers that are anomalously wide or exhibit a double peak around the maximum. In general, better rejection can be achieved using a tighter cut, but at the expense of reduced efficiency. The performance has been quantified via photon efficiency (εγ) and relative rejection ([formula]). The relative rejection basically reflects the gain in the signal (direct photon yield) relative to background (neutral hadron yield).

In this analysis, two sets of cuts have been developed, a "loose" cut set and a "tight" cut set. The performance for these two sets is summarized in Fig. [\ref=fig:bothcuts]. The loose cuts (upper panels) yield a factor of 1.3-3 relative rejection with a photon efficiency of about 90%; the tight cuts (lower panels) yield a factor of 2.5-5 relative rejection with an efficiency of about 50%.

In addition to the photon identification cuts, isolation cuts have been developed which, on their own, provide relative rejection factors of 7-10 for ET > 50 GeV. These isolation cuts cannot be used to study non-isolated photons, but in the case of γ-jet, they can be combined with the photon identification cuts to significantly reduce the background from jet-jet events. Figure [\ref=fig:rejsncent] shows the signal-to-background ratio after applying the loose shower shape cuts, the isolation cuts, and the combined cuts. The signal-to-background ratio is the best in p+p collisions, which is about factor of 4-5 larger than that for most central Pb+Pb events. However, by taking into account the benefit one gains from the likely hadron suppression (RAA = 0.2), we expect to achieve a similar level of performance that is approximately independent of the event centrality.

The left-hand panel of Fig. [\ref=fig:phospect] shows the performance for reconstructing the direct photon spectrum for a central Pb+Pb data sample, indicating that the spectrum can be measured out to at least 200 GeV at the expected luminosity per LHC Pb+Pb year (0.5 nb- 1  ×  50%). The right-hand panel shows the γ-jet correlation for 60-80 GeV photons and jets in central Pb+Pb collisions (without jet quenching or modification). For more details on the jet reconstruction, see Ref. [\cite=jets].

Conclusions

This writeup has presented the ATLAS performance for direct photon identification. The first layer of the ATLAS electromagnetic calorimeter provides an unbiased relative rejection factor of either 1.3-3 (loose shower shape cuts) or 2.5-5 (tight shower shape cuts) for neutral hadrons. The loose γ identification cuts can be combined with isolation cuts, resulting in a total relative rejection of about 20, even in central Pb+Pb collisions, providing a relatively pure sample of calibrated partons interacting with the medium. The expected luminosity per LHC Pb+Pb year (0.5 nb- 1  ×  50%) will provide 200k photons above 30 GeV, and 10k above 70 GeV per LHC year.

The tight shower shape cuts alone provide sufficient rejection against hadron decays within jets to allow the study of fragmentation photons, in-medium gluon conversion and medium-induced bremsstrahlung. This capability combined with a large acceptance is unique to ATLAS.