Using M32 to Study Rapid Phases of Stellar Evolution

Building upon an earlier program that obtained near-UV imaging of the M32 core (Brown et al. 2000), we are imaging the same field with the far-UV camera on the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph. Although only 20 of the planned 35 orbits have been completed, the far-UV image is sufficiently deep to investigate the evolution of the brightest stars in our UV color-magnitude diagram (CMD). These post-asymptotic giant branch (PAGB) and post-early AGB (PEAGB) stars evolve too rapidly for adequate study within globular clusters, but should be present in significant numbers in the core of M32. In our 25  ×  25 arcsec  UV images (excluding a 4 arcsec   ×  2.7 arcsec  ellipse on the crowded core), the integrated V=9.95 mag; both the fuel consumption theorem (Renzini 1998) and the Bertelli et al. (1994) isochrones predict 0.003 stars/yr leaving the main sequence, and thus hundreds of UV-bright stars. Using this number to constrain simulations of the observed CMD, we find significant discrepancies between the observations and expectations from canonical evolutionary tracks (Figure 1).

The evolution beyond the horizontal branch (HB) depends upon the envelope mass (and thus Teff) of the HB progenitors. We observe the expected number of AGB-Manqu[formula] stars evolving from the hot HB; these are UV-bright for 106 - 107 yr, and there should be ~  1 for every 10 hot HB stars. Theoretically, the PAGB and PEAGB stars evolving from the redder HB are UV-bright for 104 - 106 yr, but we see far fewer than expected. This cannot be explained by simply populating more massive and luminous (e.g., younger) PAGB tracks.

Figure 1. Top panel: The observed CMD of M32. A blue curve marks the zero-age HB for solar metallicity, and green crosses reflect photometric errors. Bottom panel: A simulated CMD (with appropriate errors and completeness) using our own solar-metallicity HB and post-HB tracks for a 10 Gyr population, assuming an HB distribution that approximates the observed number of hot HB and AGB-Manqu[formula] stars. The total number of HB and post-HB stars is fixed from the number of stars leaving the main sequence (see text). Most of the core He-burning stars lie on the red HB (unobserved), which should produce ~  300-1000 PAGB and PEAGB stars at mFUV  <  22 mag (depending upon the red HB distribution), compared with 29 such stars actually observed. Note also that the expected luminosity gap between the AGB-Manqu[formula] and hot HB is not present in the observations, possibly due to a spread in abundance.