=

1.25in .125in .25in

A New Formation Mechanism for the Hottest Horizontal-Branch Stars

Evolution of Hot Flashers

Castellani & Castellani (1993) first showed that stars with large mass loss on the red-giant branch (RGB) can evolve to high effective temperatures before igniting helium in their cores. We have studied the properties of these "hot flashers" by following their evolution through the helium flash to the zero-age horizontal branch (ZAHB) for various amounts of mass loss (Brown et al. 2001; Sweigart et al. 2002). Two examples of our results are given in Figure 1. The "early hot flasher" in the left panel ignites helium between the tip of the RGB and the top of the white dwarf (WD) cooling curve. Mixing between the hydrogen envelope and helium core does not occur in such stars due to the high entropy of the hydrogen shell. Early hot flashers will thus have canonical, hydrogen-rich envelopes on the EHB.

The evolution is dramatically different for the "late hot flasher" in the right panel of Figure 1. Due to the weaker hydrogen shell the flash convection zone will then penetrate deeply into the stellar envelope. Protons from the envelope will be mixed into the helium core and rapidly burned, while helium and carbon from the core will be mixed outward to the stellar surface. Such flash mixing is a consequence of the basic properties of the stellar models and should therefore occur whenever a star ignites helium on the WD cooling curve.

Flash mixing has many implications for the properties of the EHB stars:

Flash mixing produces hot EHB stars with greatly enhanced envelope helium and carbon abundances.

Flash-mixed EHB stars will appear subluminous in the UV due to their redistributed far-UV flux and larger bolometric corrections, in agreement with the subluminous EHB stars observed in ω Cen and NGC 2808.

Flash mixing leads to a sharp dichotomy in the properties of the EHB stars which may explain the gap within the EHB found in optical color-magnitude diagrams of NGC 2808.

Flash mixing on the WD cooling curve provides a new evolutionary channel for producing hydrogen-deficient stars, particularly the high gravity, helium-rich sdO stars and the minority of sdB stars that are helium-rich.

The high carbon abundance in the envelopes of the flash-mixed stars may be important for driving the pulsations of the variable sdB stars.