Simulations of dual morphology in spiral galaxies

Introduction

There is much more to spiral galaxies than is apparent from simple observations in optical light. Optical observations are dominated by young stars and gas which may constitute only 5% of a galaxy's mass. The majority of the baryonic mass of a galaxy is only revealed in infrared light. Despite the fact that young and old stars orbit in the same potential, observations in the optical and near infrared can reveal radical differences in morphology. Block & Puerari (1999) show that B and K' band images of the same galaxy can be completely decoupled and that K' band images are mostly one or two armed whereas B band images are frequently multi armed. Grosbol & Patsis (1998) find that grand design spirals are common in K' band images, but in the B band, most galaxies are flocculent with tighter spiral pitch angles of upto 7 deg .

The dual code, combining hydrodynamic and N-body techniques, has been used to recreate these dual morphologies, and ask if predictions can be made about intrinsic characteristics of spiral galaxies from their morphologies. High density regions of hydrodynamic simulations are assumed to reproduce the morphology of high luminosity regions in B band images, and N-body methods to trace the underlying mass distribution of the galaxy seen in K' band images.

Galaxy models and the dual code

The models consist of freely evolving stellar and gaseous components, and an analytic background dark halo. The motion of the stars is deduced using a simple N-body solver, and the gas by solving the non self-gravitating, isothermal Euler equations, using the FS2 algorithm of van Albada, van Leer & Roberts (1982). The units are the disk scale length Rd and the disk mass Md with G set equal to unity. Calculations take place on a 2D Cartesian grid of width 250 cells or 7.5 Rd, and with 2 ×  105 particles.

Stellar particles are drawn from the df of Dehnen (1999) at radii R  <  5. Surface density and radial velocity dispersion profiles are exponential, with scale lengths set to give a constant scale height, equated to the N-body softening length. The slope of the rotation curve at 4Rd is set to zero and the halo mass and scale length are fixed by choosing fd, the disk mass fraction at 4Rd. Choosing the minimum value of the stability parameter Q fixes the magnitude of the radial velocity dispersion. Gas starts on circular orbits at uniform surface density. The sound speed is 0.025 (10 km s- 1 if Rd = 5 kpc and [formula]).

Analysis and results

To highlight the underlying spiral structures, the images are subjected to a 2D Fourier transform using logarithmic spirals as basis states. The pitch angle ψ is related to the number of arms m and the radial wavenumber α by tan ψ  =    -  m  /  α.

Figure 1 is representative of many of the simulations, showing a grand design spiral in both stars and gas. Its Fourier spectra corroborate this: both the stars and gas are strongly peaked in the m  =  2 spectrum. Since the gaseous arms are narrow, the gas also possess significant power in the m  =  4 and m  =  6 spectra. The stellar image of Figure 2 is also strongly two armed, verified by the corresponding spectra. The gaseous image may seem a mess, but the spectra shows a strong m  =  4 structure with a similar, but smaller, pitch angle to the stars. This is similar to the morphology of our Galaxy deduced from observations by Drimmel & Spergel (2001) and simulations by Englmaier & Gerhard (1999) and Fux (1999). Lastly, the stellar structure of Figure 3 is also two armed, as seen from its spectra. However, the gas image is now completely flocculent and its spectrum is strongly peaked at all values of m. Many interfering spiral waves prevent any single spiral dominating the image.

The flocculence of the images has been quantified by realizing that grand design spirals have one strong peak in their spectrum and flocculent spirals are multiply peaked, and hence more uniform. The uniformity of a distribution is measured by its entropy, [formula]. Ignoring the m = 4 and 6 spectra, the entropy is converted into a flocculence 0 ≥  F  ≥   1 by dividing by the maximum entropy (due to a flat distribution) Smax  =   ln Nmax, where Nmax  =  1604 is the total number of components in the m  =  1,2,3 and 5 spectra.

The figures show that dual morphologies seen in B and K' band observations are recreated in simple simulations. Figure 4 shows that the gaseous pitch angles are similar to or tighter than in stellar images. It also shows that the stellar images are less flocculent than gaseous ones. In fact, almost all of the stellar models have a smooth two armed grand design structure, and the gaseous images exhibit many extra ragged small scale structures that are not seen in the stars.

The arm-interarm contrast and the gaseous flocculence correlate with a coefficient of - 0.77 (see Figure 4). Since K' band and stellar images are generally not flocculent, the gas flocculence, and hence the arm-interarm contrast, is a guide to the degree of decoupling between stellar and gaseous morphologies. The stellar arm-interarm contrast is probably also the cause of decoupling: a low contrast enables the noise in the stellar component to form low amplitude features in the gas and a flocculent structure. But with a high contrast, the stellar spiral dominates, creating a grand design gaseous spiral. Thornley (1996) observed 4 optically flocculent galaxies in the K' band and found evidence for grand design structures with arm-interarm contrasts of just 1.1 to 1.4.

The mean value of Q correlates with gaseous flocculence and stellar arm-interarm contrast (coefficients of - 0.62 and 0.81). This results from stellar particles scattering off spiral arms, with higher contrast leading to more scattering and hotter disks. However, simulations evolve non-linearly, so it is not possible to predict the initial Q from the end state of a run. A simulation's history has a large effect on the morphology at any one time. Seeds in the noise of the stellar distribution allows small scale structure to develop. The low sound speed and shocks in the gas amplifies these structures and stops them dissapearing quickly.

Conclusion

Simple simulations have reproduced some of the differences in spiral galaxy morphology in the optical and infrared. These differences can be explained by the dynamics of stars and gas, without invoking interactions, star formation or dust obscuration. In particular, gas images are more flocculent with lower pitch angles than stellar images. Stellar arm-interarm contrast and Q correlate inversely with the degree of decoupling. The effect of gas self-gravity is not known, but it is needed to model the full range of galaxies self-consistently.