Dwarf spheroidals with tidal tails and structure formation

Introduction

Dwarf galaxies in the Local Group show a striking morphology density relation; low surface brightness, gas poor dwarf spheroidals (dSphs), that are supported by velocity dispersion of their stars, are found within 300 kpc from either the MW or M31, while gas-rich, rotationally supported dwarf irregulars (dIrrs) populate the outskirts of the LG (Grebel 1999). Recently, high resolution N-Body simulations performed on supercomputers with the parallel binary treecode PKDGRAV (Stadel & Quinn, in preparation) have shown that the strong, time-dependent tidal force exerted by the halo of the Milky Way induces severe mass loss and non-axisymmetric instabilities in dIrrs, turning them into objects that match all the observed properties of dSphs in less than 10 Gyr (Mayer et al. 2001a,b). A signature left by "tidal stirring" are unbound stellar tails and streams that keep following the orbit of the satellite for several Gyr. Unbound stars lying or projected close to the spheroidal remnant might be responsible for the outer flattening of the stellar surface density profiles of some dSphs, in particular Carina (Irwin & Hatzidimitriou 1995; Majewski et al. 2000). Here we will show that such features can be used to probe structure formation models.

Initial Conditions

We place N-Body models of dwarf irregular galaxies on bound orbits in the Milky Way halo, represented by the static external potential of an isothermal sphere with a mass [formula], a virial radius RMW  ~  400 kpc and a core radius Rc = 4 kpc (the resulting circular velocity at the solar radius is ~  220 km/s). The dwarf galaxy models comprise an exponential disk of stars embedded in a dark matter halo. The sizes and masses of the halos and disks are assigned according to both structure formation models and observations (see Mayer et al. 2001b). The halo of the satellite is either a truncated isothermal sphere or an NFW model with a concentration c  <  10 (Navarro, Frenk & White 1997). The disk scale length rh is determined by the concentration (or the core radius rc in the case of an isothermal halo) and by the the spin parameter λ of the halo (see Mo et al. 1998). We consider different disk/orbit orientations and orbital eccentricities.

Results

The remnants in our N-Body simulations exhibit projected profiles with an outer flattening, like some of the dSphs, for a variety of initial conditions; both the internal structure and the orbits of the satellites determine the fraction of the stellar mass that is stripped and that can more or less alter the observed shape of the profile depending on the viewing angle (Figure 1). However, when satellites have a shallow inner density profile, like that of a truncated isothermal sphere or that of an NFW profile with a low concentration (c = 4), the observations can be reproduced with orbits having a moderate eccentricity (apo/peri=3) , whereas if they have NFW profiles with higher concentrations (c  ≥  7), as predicted by CDM models on their mass scale, nearly radial orbits are needed for a strong mass loss to occur and lead to the flattening (Figure 1). This result holds even when the disk scale length is considerably increased owing to a large halo spin parameter; the high concentration moves the tidal radius of the system too further out unless the pericenter of the orbit is very small.

Conclusion

So far, the few proper motion measurements available for LG dwarf galaxies seem to indicate that the latter have low eccentricity orbits (e.g. the Magellanic Clouds in Kroupa & Bastian 1997 and Sculptor in Schweitzer et al. 1995). If this result will be confirmed by the forthcoming generation of high-precision astrometric missions, like GAIA and SIM, the outer flattening observed in the stellar profiles of dSphs will be hardly explained within CDM models. Recently, Eke et al. (2000) have shown that in warm dark matter models small galaxy halos have NFW profiles with c  <  5; these cosmologies would easily match the observations and, in addition, could yield the correct number of satellites in galaxy halos (Moore et al. 1999) as well as halo profiles soft enough to reproduce the rotation curves of LSB galaxies (de Blok et al. 2000).