HERD BEHAVIOR OF RETURNS IN THE FUTURES EXCHANGE MARKET

Kyungsik Kim*, Seong-Min Yoona and Yup Kimb

*Department of Physics, Pukyong National University, Pusan 608-737, Korea aDivision of Economics, Pukyong National University, Pusan 608-737, Korea bDepartment of Physics, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Korea

Abstract

The herd behavior of returns is investigated in Korean futures exchange market. It is obtained that the probability distribution of returns for three types of herding parameter scales as a power law R-  β with the exponents β = 3.6(KTB203) and 2.9(KTB209) in two kinds of Korean treasury bond. For our case since the active state of transaction exists to decrease lesser than the herding parameter h = 2.33, the crash regime appears to increase in the probability with high returns values. Especially, we find that it shows a crossover toward a Gaussian probability function near the time step Δt = 360 from the distribution of normalized returns. Our result will be also compared with other well-known results.

Keywords: Herd behavior; Returns; Bond future prices *Corresponding author. Tel.: +82-51-620-6354; Fax: +82-51-611-6357. *E - mail address: kskim@pknu.ac.kr.

1. INTRODUCTION

In financial markets, there has recently been attracted the considerable interests for the microscopic models in natural and social sciences.1 - 3 It is in particular well-known that the major models of interest in self-organized phenomena are the herding multiagent model4,5 and the related percolation models,6,7 the democracy and dictatorship model,8 self-organized dynamical model,9 the cut and paste model, the fragmentation and coagulation model.10 One of challenging microscopic models is the herding model11,12 that means some degree of coordination and crowd effect between a group of agents sharing the same information or the same rumor and making a common decision. It has recently been introduced that the probability distribution of returns scales a power law and that it exists the financial crashes in the probability with low herding parameters and high return values.5 Moreover, the distribution of normalized returns has the form of the fat-tailed distributions13 of price return, and a crossover toward the Gaussian distribution can be shown in financial markets.

The theoretical and numerical arguments for the volume of bond futures traded at Korean futures exchange market were presented in the previous work.14 We mainly considered the number of transactions for two different delivery dates and found the decay functions for survival probabilities15,16 in our bond futures model. We also have studied the tick dynamical behavior of the bond futures price using the range over standard deviation or the R/S analysis in Korean Futures Exchange market.17 The Norwegian and US stock markets presented in recent work18 have been led to the notable persistence caused by long-memory in the time series. The multifractal Hurst exponents and the height-height correlation function have mainly been discussed numerically with long-run memory effects. It is particularly shown that the form of the probability distribution of the prices leads to the Lorentz distribution rather than the Gaussian distribution.17

The purpose of this paper is to study the dynamical herding behavior of the bond futures price for two kinds of Korean treasury bond in Korean futures exchange market. In this paper, we only consider two different delivery dates: October KTB203 and April KTB209. The tick data for KTB203 were taken from October 2002 to March 2002 while we used the tick data of March KTB209 transacted for six months from April 2002. In section 2 we mainly find the financial crashes and the distribution of normalized returns from the distribution of returns. We end with some results and conclusions in the final section.

2. FINANCIAL CRASHES AND SIMULATIONS

In our model, we introduce bond futures prices for two sets of data(KTB203 and KTB209) in Korean futures exchange market. In Fig.1, we show the time series of bond futures price P(t) that is found in the case of bond futures of KTB203 traded for six months at Korean futures exchange market. We can also obtain numerically the price return R(ti)  =   ln

[formula]

(a=0.3)istheso - calledcriticalherdingparameterfromourdata.Itisobtainedthatthefinancialcrashesoccurata<0.3(h>2.33).Thusthecrashregimeappearstoincreaseintheprobabilitywithhighreturnsvalues,sincethestateoftransactionexiststodecreaselesser.Particularly,wecancalculatethedistributionofnormalizedreturnsforthebondfuturespricesincethenormalizedreturnisgivenby(R-<R>)/σ,where<R>isthevalueofreturnsaveragedoverthetimeseriesandthevolatilityσ= (<R > - <R> ).InFig.5(a)and(b),weshow,respectively,thesemi - logplotoftheprobabilitydistributionofthenormalizedreturnsinonecaseofherdingprobabilitya=0.1(h=9),wherethetimestepsΔ t=1,10,60,and360fortwokindsofKoreantreasurybond.HeretheherdbehaviorforΔ t=1,10,and60isobtainedtotaketheformoffat - taileddistributionofpricereturns.Ontheotherhand,thedistributionofnormalizedreturnsreallyreducestoaGaussianprobabilityfunctionforthetimestepΔ t=360[formula]203andKTB209)inKoreanFuturesExchangemarket.Specially,thedistributionofthepricereturnforourbondfuturesscalesasapowerlawRwiththeexponents β =3.6(KTB203)and2.9(KTB209).However,ourdistributionsofthepricereturnarenotingoodagreementwiththoseofEguiluzandZimmermann.Itisinpracticefoundthatourscalingexponents β arelargerthantheirs,becauseourpricereturnsarerealvaluesforKTB203andKTB209.Itwouldbenotedthattheexistenceoffinancialcrasheshasextremelyhighprobabilityfortheactiveherdingstatesmakingthesamedecisionastheherdingparametertakesthelargervalue.Wewouldalsosuggestthatthecriticalvalueofherdingparameterish =2.33(a=0.3[formula]

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1. Time series of bond futures price P(t) for KTB203.

Figure 2. Plot of the price return R(ti)  =   ln

[formula]