Damped Lyα  absorber and the faint end of the galaxy luminosity function at high redshift

mhaehnelt@mpa-garching.mpg.de, msteinmetz@as.arizona.edu, mr@eso.org

Introduction

The physical conditions inferred from the absorption features caused by high redshift damped Lyα  absorption systems (DLAS) are, in several aspects, similar to those in the interstellar medium of present-day galaxies. It has therefore been suggested to identify DLAS with the progenitors of such galaxies (e.g. Wolfe 1988). At low redshift DLAS show a wide variety of morphologies (Le Brun et al. 1997). At high redshift, however, few have been detected in emission (Mø ller & Warren 1995; Warren & Mø ller 1995, Djorgovski et al. 1996, Djorgovski 1997, Mø ller & Warren 1998) and the nature of galaxies causing the absorption remains unclear for the majority of DLAS at high redshift. The main source of information on the nature of DLAS comes from the associated metal absorption which probes the kinematics and the chemical enrichment history of the mainly neutral gas in these systems. Motivated by the characteristic asymmetric shape of the absorption profiles of low ionization species Wolfe and collaborators (e.g. Wolfe 1986) have suggested that high-redshift DLAS are large rapidly rotating discs akin to present-day spiral galaxies (but see also Ledoux et al. 1998). In this picture the generally low observed metallicity of high redshift DLAS (Pettini 1994, Lu 1996, Pettini 1999) is taken as evidence that these are still chemically young (Lindner, Fritze-von Alvensleben & Fricke 1999).

The conjecture of DLAS being large rotating discs is, however, at odds with the velocity width distribution, the size and the total cross section of rapidly rotating discs predicted by hierarchical cosmogonies (Haehnelt, Steinmetz and Rauch 1998, hereafter HSR98). Hydrodynamical simulations (Katz et al. 1996; Haehnelt, Steinmetz & Rauch 1996; Gardner et al. 1997ab; Rauch, Haehnelt & Steinmetz 1997) show that gas condensations leading to damped Lyα absorption do indeed occur in such scenarios. However, the hierarchical cosmogonies predict that a significant fraction of the cross section for damped absorption is contributed by gas in halos with circular velocities as small as 50  km  s- 1 (Ma & Bertschinger 1994; Mo & Miralda-Escudé 1994; Klypin et al. 1995, Kauffmann 1996, Mo, Mao & White 1999; Gardener et al. 1999), where we define the circular velocity as [formula] at a radius where the overdensity is equal to 200. In HSR98 we have shown that the shape of the absorption profiles is not unique but can be equally well produced by merging proto-galactic clumps (cf. Nulsen, Barcon & Fabian 1998; McDonald & Miralda-Escudé 1999, Maller et al. 1999). In HSR98 we further showed that the observed velocity width distribution of the absorption features of low ionization species can be reproduced in a standard cold dark matter (SCDM) cosmology. At the same time hierarchical cosmogonies such as SCDM have been shown to reproduce the basic properties of the observed population of high-redshift galaxies (Adelberger et al. 1998; Steidel et al. 1998; Baugh et al. 1998; Bagla 1998; Jing & Suto 1998; Haehnelt Natarajan & Rees 1998; Jing & Suto 1998; Contardo, Steinmetz & Fritze-von Alvensleben 1998; Steinmetz 1998; Kauffmann et al. 1999; Mo, Mao & White 1999). Here we establish a link between emission and absorption properties of high-redshift galaxies. In section 2 we briefly test if our previous findings depend on cosmology. In section 3 we predict the luminosity and impact parameter distribution of high-redshift galaxies responsible for DLAS. Section 4 contains our conclusions.

The velocity width distribution of DLAS

In hierarchical CDM-like cosmogonies DLAS arise naturally from the cool gas that accumulates at the center of dark matter (DM) halos (e.g. Katz et al. 1996, Gardner et al. 1997a/b). Absorption features of low ionization species like SiII are generally believed to be good tracers of the motion of this gas in a gravitational potential well (Prochaska & Wolfe 1997, 1998). One major characteristic of these absorption features is their overall width which in HSR98 we have shown to be correlated with the circular velocity of the DM halo hosting the DLAS. However, for a halo of given circular velocity a statistical distribution of velocity widths p((vwid|vc) arises due to different orientations of the line-of-sight and different dynamical states of the gas of the DM halos. Halos with small circular velocities are believed to lose most of their gas due to feedback effects. The velocity width distribution of DLAS as probed by low ionization species can thus be written as

[formula]

In HSR98 we used simulated absorption profiles for a set of haloes with 50  km  s- 1  <  vc  <  250  km  s- 1 to investigate p(vwid|vc) for a SCDM model and found that the distribution does not depend explicitly on vc and depends little on redshift. We therefore assume p(vwid|vc) to be a function of vwid / vc only. In order to check if there is a dependence on cosmology we repeated our analysis for a ΛCDM model (see table 1 for the assumed model parameters and HSR98 for details of the simulations). Figure 1 shows p(vwid / vc) averaged over different halos and lines-of-sight. There is little difference between the two cosmological models.

Once the cross-section weighting for damped absorption is known the velocity width distribution is readily calculated from the distribution of circular velocities [formula]. It is currently difficult to infer this cross-section weighting reliably from numerical simulations. Gardner et al. (1997) e.g. found that the cross section of DM halos scales as a power-law of the circular velocity as v2.3 - 3c. In their later work they found a much shallower scaling v0.4 - 1.1c (Gardner et al. 1999). This cross-section weighting is likely to be sensitive to the energy and momentum input due to supernovae which is difficult to include properly in these simulations.

Here we take a different approach and use the observed velocity width distribution to determine the mean cross section weighting for damped absorption. We also choose a power-law parameterization

[formula]

Using the Press-Schechter formalism we calculate pPS(vc) and obtain the velocity width distributions shown in Figure 2. The observed distributions are well fit with β  ~  2.5 - 3 (see table 1) and v min  =  50  km  s- 1. Note that there is little evolution with redshift in the observed as well as in the predicted distribution. The values of beta are close to the old value but quite different to the new value of Gardner et al.  (1997,1999).

Predicting emission propertings

The luminosity distribution of DLAS

Recently, it has become possible to determine the luminosity function for the population of star-forming galaxies detected at high redshift (Steidel et al. 1996, Steidel et al. 1999). The luminosity function at z=3 can be reproduced if a simple linear scaling of the luminosity in the R band (Steidel et al. 1996) with mass of the DM halo is assumed,

[formula]

(Haehnelt, Natarayan & Rees 1998). The required values of m0R are also shown in table 1. The same simple model can also reproduce the clustering strength of high-redshift galaxies and its decrease with decreasing limiting UV luminosity of the galaxy sample (but see Somerville, Primack & Faber (1999) for a somewhat different model). Note that the linear scaling of the UV luminosity with mass does not necessarily imply that the star formation rate scales linearly with the mass of the DM halo as the dust extinction of the UV luminosity is probably luminosity dependent (Steidel et al.  1999). If we make the plausible assumption that high-redshift galaxies are hosted by the same population of dark matter halos that are causing DLAS and assume that the linear scaling of the UV luminosity with mass can be extrapolated to smaller masses we can predict the luminosity distribution of DLAS. All we need to know is the scaling of the cross-section of DM halos for damped absorption with circular velocity which we already inferred in the last section from the velocity width distribution. The result is shown in Figure 3. 80 to 90 percent of DLAS are predicted to be fainter than mR  =  25.5 (the spectroscopic limit), rather independent of cosmology. Some of these may be faint Lyα  emitters (Fynbo, Thomsen & Mø ller 1999) but most of them will probably be very difficult to identify reliably.

The impact parameter distribution of DLAS

Similarly we can also predict the impact parameter distribution (Fig. 3b). The overall rate of incidence,   dN  /    dz  =  0.2 (Storrie-Lombardi et al. 1996), determines the normalization of the cross-section weighting. The corresponding values of r0damp  =  rdamp(vc  =  200  km  s- 1) are given in table 1. The predicted impact parameters range between 0.3 and 1 arcsec, rather independent of cosmology. The parameter r0200  =  r200(vc  =  200  km  s- 1), i.e. the radius at which the overdensity is equal to 200  ×  ρcrit is also listed in table 1.

The typical radii of the region causing damped absorption are generally about 25 to 50 percent of r200 of the corresponding DM halo. This is about a factor ten larger than the expected scale length of a centrifugally supported disc if the angular momentum of the gas is due to tidal torquing during the collapse of the DM halo (Mo, Mao & White 1998). Note that with the assumed scaling of the cross section rdamp increases more steeply with circular velocity ([formula]) than r200 ([formula]).

Conclusions

In hierarchical cosmogonies DLAS are mainly caused by merging protogalactic clumps hosted by collapsed DM halos. The observed velocity width of the absorption profiles of associated low ionization species is well reproduced for a a range of CDM variants which reproduce the present-day space density of galaxy clusters.

By combining the cross-section weighting inferred from the observed velocity width distribution with the mass luminosity relation inferred from the luminosity function and clustering properties of high redshift galaxies it is possible to link absorption and emission properties of DLAS. About 10 to 20% of DLAS are predicted to be brighter than mR = 25.5. Expected impact parameter typically range between 0.3 and 1 arcsec but there is a pronounced tail of larger impact parameters. The predictions seem consistent with the luminosities and impact parameters of the small number of DLAS with spectroscopically identified emission (see e.g. Mø ller & Warren 1998 for an overview). In our model these would be drawn from the tail of the distribution at the bright end and at large impact parameter, respectively. The rather faint flux levels and small impact parameter predicted for the majority of DLAS explains why searches for the emission from DLAS have been notoriously difficult.

The predicted impact parameters are nevertheless about a factor three to five larger than the typical radii of the luminous regions of Lyman-break galaxies. Thus, DLAS at high redshift should preferentially sample the outer regions of galaxies at the faint end of the luminosity function. This is consistent with the low observed metallicities in DLAS and the outer regions of galaxies. In our model DLAS should not be expected to show the high metallicities estimated for Lyman break galaxies (Pettini et al. 1999); the latter are derived from emission spectra, which are dominated by the light from the more highly enriched central regions.

Hierarchical cosmogonies predict Lyman-break galaxies with mR < 25 to become part of bright galaxies in galaxy clusters at the present day. The fainter galaxies responsible for DLAS should, however, be the building blocks of more typical (L*) present-day galaxies consistent with the findings from chemical evolution models for DLAS. Most high-redshift DLAS are predicted to be too faint to obtain spectra even with 10m telescopes unless they are strongly magnified by gravitational lensing. The analysis of their absorption properties is currently the prime method for studying the progenitors of normal present-day galaxies.