Lemma Proposition Corollary Claim

Definition Example

Remark Question

The orders of torsion units in integral group rings of finite solvable groups

Introduction

Does a torsion unit in the integral group ring G of a finite group G necessarily has the same order as some element of G? Of course, torsion coming from the coefficient ring should be excluded, that is, only torsion units from (G), the group of units of augmentation one in G, will be considered. When G is solvable, this note provides an affirmative answer, but else we are left without a clue. It is known that the answer is affirmative for torsion units of prime power order, and that the order of any torsion unit divides the exponent of G, see Cohn and Livingstone (1965) or Zassenhaus (1974). The question to be considered is included as Research Problem 8 in the book of Sehgal (1993), where an affirmative answer is given for metabelian groups by Lemma (37.14). It should be seen in the context of the stronger conjectures of Zassenhaus about rational conjugacy of torsion units (see Sehgal, 1993, Chapter 5). In the course of his work on these conjectures, Weiss (1988) proved a beautiful theorem about p-permutation lattices (cf. Sehgal, 1993, Appendix). The present contribution relies on this theorem, as does already previous work of the author (Hertweck, 2006, 2007) from which the method of proof is taken.

Recall that for a group ring element [formula] (all ag in [formula]), its partial augmentation with respect to an element x of G, or rather its conjugacy class xG in G, is the sum [formula]; we will denote it by εx(u). Our result is as follows.

The author's interest in proving such a result was stimulated by recent work of Höfert and Kimmerle on the prime graph of (G) (see Kimmerle, 2006, ). They showed, for solvable G, that a unit in (G) of order pq, for distinct primes p and q, can only exist if G has an element of order pq. Their method of proof is the one described in Cohn and Livingstone (1965) and Zassenhaus (1974), which provides certain congruences for the partial augmentations of the p-th and q-th powers of the unit in question. Roughly speaking, they noticed that in a specific situation, which can be reached inductively, the presence of a normal p-subgroup of G can be used to turn one of these congruences into an equality, yielding the result.

Finally, we remark that, as with other results in this field, the theorem can be formulated for more general coefficient rings than [formula], notably for the semilocalization of [formula] at the prime divisors of the order of G. We stick to the basic case only to reduce notational effort.

Proof of the theorem

The information provided by Weiss' theorem which we will use can be found in of Hertweck (2006) and is described in the following proposition. Let G be a finite group. We fix a rational prime p and let p stand for the p-adic integers.

Suppose that G has a normal p-subgroup N, and that U is a finite subgroup of (G) which maps to 1 under the natural map G  →  G / N. Then U is a p-group, and pG, when considered as pU-lattice via the (right) multiplication action of U, is projective.

Indeed, under the assumptions made, it readily follows that U is a p-group, and Weiss' theorem guarantees that pG is a permutation lattice for U over p. From that, one obtains that U is conjugate to a subgroup of N by a unit in G (see Hertweck, 2006, Proposition 4.2). Combined together, this implies the proposition.

The next proposition describes how this will be applied. The line of proof is that of Hertweck (2007), Proposition 2.2, with roles of torsion unit and group element interchanged, but we repeat the argument for convenience of the reader.

Suppose that G has a normal p-subgroup N, and that u is a torsion unit in (G) whose image under the natural map G  →  G / N has strictly smaller order than u. Then εg(u) = 0 for every element g of G whose p-part has strictly smaller order than the p-part of u.

By assumption, 〈u〉 has a subgroup of order p which maps to 1 under the map G  →  G / N. Suppose that g is an element of G whose p-part has strictly smaller order than the p-part of u. Let C be an (abstract) cyclic group whose order is the least common multiple of the orders of u and g. Set M = pG, viewed as pC-lattice by letting a generator c of C act by m  ·  c = g- 1mu for m∈M. By (38.12) in Sehgal (1993), we have to show that χ(c) = 0 for the character χ of C afforded by M. Note that c is p-singular, so this will follow once we have shown the stronger statement that M is a projective pC-lattice, by Green's Theorem on Zeros of Characters (see (19.27) in Curtis and Reiner, 1981). This in turn follows from the assumption, meaning that the action of the subgroup P of order p in C is given by a multiplication action of the subgroup of order p in 〈u〉, which shows that M is a projective pP-lattice, by Proposition [\ref=P1]. We provide details. Set k = p / pp  =   / p. It is enough to show that [formula] as kC-module is projective (see (20.10) or (30.11) in Curtis and Reiner, 1981), i.e., that [formula] is projective relative to a Sylow p-subgroup of C. It is well-known that this follows from the projectivity of [formula] as kP-module (see Hertweck, 2006, Lemma 3.2).

We will use the following elementary observation. Let N be a normal subgroup of G and set  = G / N. For a torsion unit u in G, we shall extend the bar convention when writing ū for the image of u under the natural map G  →  . We let ~   denote the conjugacy relation in a group. Since any conjugacy class of G maps onto a conjugacy class of [formula], we have for any x∈G:

[formula]

We now turn to the proof of the theorem. Let G be a finite solvable group, and let u be a torsion unit in (G). The proof is by induction on the order of G. Since G is solvable, we can choose a nontrivial normal p-subgroup N of G. Set  = G / N. Then ū denotes the image of u under the homomorphism (G)  →  (). Inductively, there is an element x in G such that x̄ and ū have the same order and εx̄(ū)  ≠  0. Let g∈G such that   ~  x̄. Note that if g has strictly greater order than u, then εg(u) = 0 by Theorem 2.3 in Hertweck (2007). We distinguish two cases. Firstly, suppose that ū has the same order as u. Then the order of g is strictly greater than or equal to the order of u. Thus the sum in [\eqref=E1] extends only over those classes gG for which g has the same order as u, and since at least one summand must contribute to its nonzero value, we obtain the desired result. Secondly, suppose that ū has strictly smaller order than u. Since [formula] and ū have the same order, the orders of g and u have the same [formula]-part. Hence if g has strictly smaller order than u, then εg(u) = 0 by Proposition [\ref=P2]. Thus the sum in [\eqref=E1] again extends only over those classes gG for which g has the same order as u, and we are done.

References