1.25in .125in .25in

Neutrino Properties from Measurements using Astrophysical and Terrestrial Sources

Introduction

The neutrino has been very elusive in revealing its basic properties to experimenters. However, it provides a very attractive means for the study of many astrophysical objects such as the Sun, supernovae and other astrophysical sources producing high energy particles. The study of neutrinos from these sources can provide information on both the sources and on basic properties of neutrinos themselves. This paper will discuss the current state of information on neutrino properties, in several cases obtained from measurements with astrophysical sources. Future neutrino measurements will be described for astrophysical or terrestrial sources. Other papers in this session will discuss measurements of astrophysical sources using this basic information on neutrino properties.

Neutrino Properties

Number of neutrino types

The number of active neutrino types has been restricted for many years by studies of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (for a summary see Hagiwara et al, 2002) to be less than about 4, but considerably more accuracy has been obtained through measurements of the width of the Z0 resonance that set a number of 2.994  ±  0.012. Neutrino flavor change measurements show no evidence for sterile neutrinos.

Neutrino Flavor Change

Several measurements have indicated that neutrino flavor change occurs; the most favored explanation for the mechanism is neutrino oscillations among finite mass eigenstates. The neutrino flavor fields [formula] can be expressed as superpositions of the components νk of the fields of neutrinos with definite masses mk via U, the 3 x 3 unitary Maki-Nakagawa-Sakata-Pontecorvo (MNSP) mixing matrix (Maki et al, 1962, Gribov and Pontecorvo, 1969).

The MNSP matrix can be parameterized in terms of 3 Euler angle rotations and a CP-violating phase δCP,

[formula]

where cij  =   cos θij and sij  =   sin θij.

When the neutrinos travel in a vacuum or low density region and two mass eigenstates dominate the process, the following probability is predicted for subsequent detection of a given neutrino type after it has traveled for a distance L in vacuum: P  =  1  -  1 / 2 sin 2(2θij)(1  -   cos (2.54Δm2L / E), where Δm2 is the difference between the two relevant mass eigenstates in eV2, L is the source-detector distance in meters, E is the neutrino energy in MeV and θij is defined above. When the neutrinos pass through regions of high electron density, the difference in the interaction of electron neutrinos and other neutrinos due to the charged current interaction can add extra terms to the MNSP matrix, resulting in a change to the effective masses and coupling constants. This is referred to as the MSW effect (Mikeyev and Smirnov, 1985, Wolfenstein, 1978) and can be used to determine the sign of the mass difference of the two dominant neutrinos involved in the oscillation.

Atmospheric Neutrinos

Super-Kamiokande has observed a zenith angle dependence that is consistent with flavor change of atmospheric muon neutrinos through oscillations with a baseline of the Earth's dameter. The zenith angle dependence for electron neutrinos is consistent with Monte Carlo calculations for no flavor change, implying that the muon flavor change is predominantly to tau neutrinos. The hypothesis of neutrino oscillations is consistent with measurements made by a number of other detectors of an anomalous ratio of muon to electron atmospheric neutrinos.

Solar Neutrinos

Since Davis' experiments starting in the 1960's, a discrepancy was identified between the experimental measurements and the theoretical calculations for solar neutrino fluxes. The fluxes are factors of two or three lower than predictions in each case, leading to the conclusion that either solar models are incomplete or there are processes occurring such as flavor change to other neutrino types for which the experiments have little or no sensitivity. This 30-year old discrepancy had come to be known as the "Solar Neutrino Problem".

Many attempts have been made to understand these discrepancies in terms of modifications to the solar model, without significant success. The results may be understood in terms of neutrino flavor change with matter enhancement in the sun. However, because the various experiments have different thresholds and are sensitive to different combinations of the nuclear reactions in the sun, this explanation is solar model-dependent. Solar model-independent approaches, including searches for spectral distortion, day-night and seasonal flux differences provided no clear indication of flavor change.

Measurements by the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO) of interactions of 8B solar neutrinos in a heavy water detector have provided a solar-model-independent "appearance" measurement of neutrino flavor change by comparing charged current (CC) interactions on deuterium sensitive only to electron neutrinos and neutral current (NC) interactions sensitive to all neutrino types. A null hypothesis test for flavor change was performed, assuming no spectral change for the CC reaction. The flux of active neutrinos or anti-neutrinos other than electron neutrinos inferred from the NC measurements yielded a 5.3σ difference from the CC flux, providing clear evidence for flavor change. The result for the total active neutrino flux obtained with the NC reaction, 5.09+ 0.44- 0.43(stat.)+ 0.46- 0.43(syst.), is in very good agreement with the value calculated (Bahcall et al, 2001) by solar models: 5.05  ±  1.0  ×  106  ~  cm- 2s- 1.

The solar neutrino measurements to date are best fit by neutrino oscillation parameters (see Table 1) including the MSW effect in the sun, referred to as the Large Mixing Angle (LMA) region. Note that the matter interaction defines m2 to be greater than m1 and that the mixing angle is somewhat smaller than maximal mixing.

Terrestrial Measurements

Measurements of the survival of νμ neutrinos produced at the KEK accelerator have been made with the Super-Kamiokande detector, (K2K experiment). The preliminary data (Nishikawa, 2002) show agreement with the m2 to m3 oscillation parameters observed for atmospheric neutrinos. The KamLAND experiment (Eguchi et al, 2003) has studied the flux of electron anti-neutrinos observed at a 1000 ton liquid scintillator detector (converted from the original water-based Kamiokande detector). They find a flux suppression consistent only with the LMA region for m1 - m2 oscillation as defined by solar neutrinos and restricting the region obtained with solar neutrino measurements alone. Results from the LSND experiment have indicated the appearance of a small flux of anti-νe from an anti-νμ accelerator beam. The majority of the allowed oscillation region for this experiment has been restricted by the Karmen experiment. The MINIBOONE experiment has just begun operation with neutrino beams from Fermilab and should approach the LSND measurements with substantially higher sensitivity.

Summary of flavor change information to date

Atmospheric, solar, and reactor neutrino oscillation data currently fix or limit the 3 angles. They also provide values for the differences between the squares of the masses. They provide no information yet on the phase(s). The data to date is summarized in Table 1.

Neutrino Mass

The most sensitive direct measurements of electron neutrino mass have been made by searching for curvature induced near the end point of the spectrum of electrons emitted during the beta decay of tritium. The current limit obtained from these measurements is 2.8 eV (90 % CL.). Measurements of neutrinoless double beta decay are also sensitive to neutrino mass if the neutrino is a Majorana particle. Measurements to date set limits less than 0.4 eV for the effective mass associated with this process. There is also a controversial claim of a greater than 2 σ effect for a mass of 0.35 eV in a neutrinoless double beta decay measurement in Ge reported by a subset of the Heidelberg-Moscow experimental group. Model-dependent limits with sensitivity of about 1 eV can also be obtained from combined fits to the cosmic microwave and large scale structure data.

Future measurements

All of the types of measurements discussed above are being pursued very actively for the future. The next generation measurements for tritium beta decay and neutrinoless double beta decay should extend the mass sensitivity by a factor of about 10. This sensitivity is approaching the mass differences identified by the oscillation measurements. Flavor change measurements will be extended for solar and terrestrial neutrinos with improved accuracy. The definition of these parameters has also led to plans for a next generation of long-baseline experiments to quantify θ13 through accelerator and reactor experiments and seek the mass hierarchy through matter interactions and CP violating phase through experiments with accelerator and detector properties scaled up by factors of 10.

Our knowledge of neutrino properties has expanded greatly during the past 10 years. The next generations of experiments have the potential to provie as comprehensive information for the lepton sector as has been obtained for quarks, thereby making it possible to use neutrinos as a unique astrophysical probe.