=

1.25in .125in .25in

Study on Neutron-induced Background in the CRESST Experiment

Sources of Neutron Background

The flux of neutrons in the vicinity of CRESST (Jagemann et al. 2003) is dominated by low energy neutrons induced by radioactivity in the surrounding rock/concrete. In addition, a very small remaining impurity in the material used in the setup can induce significant background if higher sensitivity is to be aimed for.

Although the flux of high energy neutrons induced by muons in the rock is small compared to the total flux at the experimental site, this component can penetrate a neutron moderator, reach the setup and produce additional neutrons through spallations. Moreover, neutrons can be produced by muons in the experimental setup, particularly in the lead shield.

To investigate the contribution of each neutron source to the expected background rate in CRESST II, a study based on Monte Carlo simulations has been performed. For this purpose different Monte Carlo codes have been employed, namely MCNP4B (Briesmeister 1997), MCNPX (Waters 1999), FLUKA (Fasso 2001) and MUSIC (Antonioli 1999).

Neutron Background Rates Expected in CRESST II

The contributions of different neutron sources to the count rate in the 15-25 keV interval in a CaWO4 detector are shown in Table 1. In CRESST II, 60 GeV WIMPs with a cross section as claimed by the DAMA experiment in (Bernabei et al. 2000) would give 55 cts/kg/y in the same energy range. This makes it difficult for CRESST II to check the DAMA evidence without a neutron moderator. The flux of low energy neutrons from the surrounding rock/concrete can be reduced effectively by a hydrogen-rich material like polyethylene. For the CRESST II setup a polyethylene shield (35-50 cm thick) is advisable. This will reduce the background count rate in the CaWO4 detector by up to three orders of magnitude. Then the background will be dominated by neutrons from other origins (see Table 1) and the sensitivity of the experiment for the WIMP-nucleon cross section would be limited to about 10- 7  pb.

The remaining neutron flux with the neutron moderator installed is dominated by neutrons induced by muons in the lead shield. It is possible to suppress this neutron background by detecting the muons and rejecting muon coincident events. For CRESST II a muon veto system is planned in addition to a neutron moderator. This will enable CRESST II to reach the projected sensitivity of below 10- 7  pb. The muon veto will be placed inside the polyethylene shield and will have an efficiency of more than 90%.

However, the muon veto will reduce the neutron background only by a factor of three, unless high energy neutrons from the rock can be overcome. Neutrons scattered in more than one detector can be rejected as background, because WIMPs do not scatter multiply. Therefore the neutron background will be further reduced and multiple scattering can also be engaged to determine the remaining single scatter neutron background. Such a simulation with an array of detectors will be done in the near future to investigate, which sensitivity level can be reached by this technique.