The Question Whether an Energy Gap Does Exist in Helium II or Not

Introduction

In the present time, it is considered the complete understanding has been attained of the microscopic pattern of superfluidity in Helium II. The up-to-date state of the theory of Helium II can be learned by perusing study  [\cite=bib-1].

Nonetheless, it seems to be useful to search for new superfluidity mechanisms, particularly, in the cases when a simple method is proposed to experimentally verify the assumptions put forward. Even if the experiment does not substantiate these assumptions, its performance may lead to the uncovering of novel effects that are of interest for research workers.

The present communication describes a version of the introduction of an energy parameter in the superfluidity theory. An experiment will also be suggested on measuring a temperature dependence of a "superfluidity gap" thus formed.

MODEL OF ONE-PARTICLE ENERGY SPECTRUM

At present, it hardly makes sense to specify the process of accounting for the interatomic interaction occurring in Helium II. We simply assume that in the course of this process one-particle energy of the main orbital has torn off from the remaining, excited orbitals with the formation of an energy gap. Formally, this may be described by introducing a one-particle energy spectrum Ep of the following type

[formula]

at p > 0, and

[formula]

where M and p are the mass and momentum of 4He atom respectively, and [formula] is the energy gap depending on temperature. It is assumed that [formula] vanishes at the λ-point. Moreover, we assume the Galilean symmetry in the Hamiltonian of interatomic interaction. Accordingly, the Galilean asymmetry of the energy spectrum Ep is due only to the configuration of the occupation numbers of the ground state of the system, and the presence of a gap in the one-particle spectrum will not prevent a liquid flow from arising in it.

In the suggested scheme of energy levels, the temperature dependence of [formula] is experimentally determined in the following way. Assume that we have succeeded in inducing in Helium II an electric field with a large spatial gradient; for example, in a space between two sharply ground needle tips. Such a field will affect 4He atoms via dipole moments induced in them. If the electric field frequency coincides with the value of [formula], atoms start to be excited, which will be conducive to the appearance of an absorption edge of electromagnetic wave energy.

CONCLUSION

I am well aware of the fact that the scheme of levels as proposed in Eqs. ([\ref=1]-[\ref=2]) is so far of a hypothetical character. If the experiment confirms the existence of a "superfluidity gap", then one hardly will perceive a deficiency in the models of interatomic interaction, leading to a clarification of the effect. On the other hand, the performance of the suggested experiment may reveal other unobvious effects in the superfluid system.