cm Variant Proposition Lemma Corollary Remark Definition Example Conjecture

A remark on a question of Beauville about lagrangian fibrations

Keywords: holomorphic symplectic manifolds, lagrangian tori, fibrations.

Let X be an irreducible holomorphic symplectic variety of dimension 2n, with a lagrangian torus A  ⊂  X (such a torus is always an abelian variety, even if X is not projective: this follows from the fact that the space H2,0(X) restricts to zero on A, see [\cite=C]). Beauville [\cite=B] asked whether there always exists a lagrangian fibration f (holomorphic or almost holomorphic), such that A is a fiber of f. Recently, D. Greb, C. Lehn and S. Rollenske [\cite=GLR] proved that it is always the case when X is non-projective, or even admits a non-projective deformation preserving the lagrangian subtorus. It is not clear a priori whether all irreducible holomorphic symplectic varieties admit such deformations. The authors also have announced another paper in preparation, where Beauville's question is answered in the affirmative in dimension four. The purpose of this short note is to provide an answer to the "almost holomorphic version" of Beauville's question in dimension four in a very elementary way.

Since the torus A  ⊂  X is lagrangian, its normal bundle NA,X, being isomorphic to its cotangent bundle, is trivial. The deformation theory of lagrangian tori in holomorphic symplectic manifolds is well understood: as it is explained in [\cite=GLR], by the results of Ran and Voisin the space T of deformations of A in X is of dimension n, it is smooth at A, and any deformation At of A which is smooth is itself a lagrangian torus. Moreover, if Y denotes the universal family of the At's, the projection q:Y  →  X is unramified along each smooth At. In particular, one has a finite number d of At's through a general point of X, and if through a certain point x∈X there is an infinite number of At then almost all of them are singular (in fact, if Y denotes the universal family, the projection q:Y  →  X is unramified along each smooth At). To show that there is an almost holomorphic fibration with fibers At is the same as to show that d = 1, or that a general At does not intersect any other member As.

To say the same things using slightly different words, from the above-mentioned facts on the universal family map q the following is immediate.

Fact: Locally in a neighbourhood U of A, one has a lagrangian fibration by its small deformations At.

One has to show that this local fibration gives rise to a global, possibly meromorphic, fibration.

Let us list a few immediate consequences of this fact in a lemma. We assume for simplicity that X is projective.

Lemma 1: a) A lagrangian torus does not intersect its small deformations;

b) Whenever [formula] and As is smooth, all irreducible components of [formula] are positive-dimensional;

c) For a general As' intersecting At, the intersection [formula] is equidimensional.

Proof: Whereas a) is immediate from the existence of a local fibration, b) deserves a few words of explanation. Consider the local fibration fs:Us  →  Ts in a neighbourhood of As (here Ts is a small disc around s∈T). The intersection of At with Us may consist of several local components. The statement that [formula] cannot have a zero-dimensional component is clearly implied by the claim that no component of [formula] dominates the base Ts (indeed, such a component would have zero-dimensional general fiber under the map fs, whereas for a non-dominating component all fibers are of strictly positive dimension). If this claim does not hold, we can choose a sufficiently general point s'∈Ts outside of the image of all non-dominating components of [formula]. The resulting lagrangian torus As' has non-empty zero-dimensional intersection with At. This is impossible since the self-intersection number ·  [A] = 0.

The proof of c) is similar to b): it suffices to choose s'∈Ts sufficiently general in a "maximal" image of a component of [formula]. If this image is of dimension c, the intersection [formula] is purely (n - c)-dimensional.

Consider now the case dim(X) = 4, then the intersection [formula] is a curve if nonempty. Fix a general lagrangian torus At. Since the family of its deformations As,s∈T induces a local fibration in the neighbourhood of each smooth member, the intersections [formula] induce a fibration or several fibrations on At. Indeed, since most of the As intersecting At are smooth, this is a family of cycles on At not intersecting their neighbours, as are the As on X itself; since these cycles are divisors on a surface, those are (possibly reducible) curves whose square is equal to zero, that is, our At is fibered in elliptic curves and our intersections are unions of fibers.

Of course, the As intersecting At do not necessarily form an irreducible family, so apriori there can be several (say, k > 1) such fibrations on At. Nevertheless an easy linear algebra argument shows that there is in fact only one:

Proposition 2: One has k = 1.

Proof: Otherwise, we can find two more tori Au and As through a general point p of At, in such a way that the pairwise intersections Cts, Ctu and Cus are curves with distinct tangents at p and the intersection of all three tori has p as an isolated point. One deduces easily from Sard's lemma that for general t,s, the intersection [formula] is reduced, so we may assume that the tangent planes to Au, As and At are distinct. But since the pairwise intersections of those planes in TpX are distinct lines, the planes only span a hyperplane V  ⊂  TpX. Now the restriction σV of the symplectic form σp, that is, the value of σ at p, to V has one-dimensional kernel. Recall that TpAu, TpAs and TpAt are σp-isotropic. Since V = TpAt + TpAs, one must have TpCts = Ker(σV). But by the same reason the same holds for TpCtu, a contradiction.

Now we are ready to prove the announced result, which we formulate as a theorem.

Theorem 3: The answer to the almost holomorphic version of Beauville's question is positive in dimension 4, that is, a general At does not intersect any other As, so that d = 1 and the family At induces an almost holomorphic fibration on X.

Proof: Suppose d > 1, then we claim that the irreducible components of the intersections [formula] rationally fiber X, that is, there is only one such curve through a general point p∈X. Indeed, suppose there are two of them, C1 and C2. Then C1 is a component of the intersection [formula] and C2 of [formula]. Since p is general in X, we may suppose that all four of the above abelian surfaces are smooth. Each pair of those four tori intersect at p, and we know that they should then intersect along a curve through p. Looking at the possible configurations and keeping in mind that the intersection of smooth surfaces is a disjoint union of elliptic curves, one is back to what is just ruled out in Proposition 2.

On the other hand, it is proved in [\cite=AC], Proposition 3.4, that any rational fibration [formula] of an irreducible holomorphic symplectic variety X has fibers of dimension at least dim(X) / 2, provided that the general fiber is not of general type. Since the irreducible components of [formula] are elliptic curves, they cannot rationally fiber X, a contradiction.

Remark 4: This argument generalizes to higher-dimensional X in the case when the intersection of two general (intersecting) lagrangian tori [formula] is of codimension one in each; so if 2n = dim(X), one wants [formula] to be equal to n - 1; when n = 2 this is of course the only option unless X is fibered by the At's. More precisely, [formula] must be of dimension n - 1 for each general pair of intersecting lagrangian tori: that is to say, the subset [formula] can have several irreducible components [formula], such that a generic pair of tori in Wi intersects in dimension ei, and for our argument we need this dimension to be equal to n - 1 for any [formula]. As soon as this condition is satisfied, the same reasoning as above applies to show the existence of an almost holomorphic lagrangian fibration with fibers At.

We hope to return to Beauville's question in a forthcoming joint work with Frédéric Campana.