Quantum Clouds: A future perspective

Introduction

It all began in 1981 with Richard P. Feynman quoting “ Can we simulate physics on a computer?” Well, though quite intriguing but answer to that question as of right now is obviously no and the only reason for that is a significant part of physics is Quantum physics which can’t be simulated on the computers present today, ie, the classical computers.

Consider a system comprising of 30 particles. In Quantum physics we have variables in superposition equation to define a state of a particle. Consider that two variables are associated with each particle then, corresponding to a system of 30 particles we can have a state being described by 2 to the power of 30 variables, ie, a machine is in a state given by the combination of these variables. That amount of data can be stored with present classical computers. But what if number of particles go beyond 100. Correspondingly we’ll have 2 to the power of 100 variables. Now this can’t be simulated on a classical computer, since they don’t have this much memory and they never will !

Feynman suggested “One can turn problem into an effect“. If Quantum physics is too rough for present computers may be we can use it to build better computers!

Let's discuss a computing perspective.

One person who has been looking at the miniaturization of computers is Gordon Moore, also the co-founder of intel back in 1960’s. He predicted that number of components on a chip doubles every 18 months to two years[\cite=Vitanyi]. Therefore, the smallest feature size on the Si chip has to decrease at the same rate. Hence, the Moore’s law. What’s amazing about Moore’s law is that you can predict what’s going to happen in time. Now, If we follow this law, less than 10 years from now, ie, as we approach 2020, the size of transistor will reduce to the size of an atom- the smallest component of nature. Thereby, here we enter the Quantum realm.

Hence either way Quantum computing is inevitable future of computing.

Another developing scenario of Computing is Cloud Computing, pointing towards a future in wherein we do not compute on local machines rather on centralized computing facilities driven by a third-party, controlling computing and storage facilities.

Cloud computing is not a new term but has been into the market for a while now. Though being a strong futuristic Computing model it suffers from various research challenges[\cite=zhang2010cloud] like :

These are the issues preventing further progress in clouds. In this paper we explore a fascinating link between the two giants of futuristic computing "Cloud Computing" and the "Quantum Computing" and how they complement each other. A totally different way of addressing the issuesof clouds than the conventional methods. "Quantum Clouds" is thereby not just a solution to the challenges faced by cloud computing but a step forward in technical aspects of this computing model which quite unexpectedly marks the advent of quantum technology even more inevitable. What's even more fascinating is that quantum computing fills all the voids left by classical technology at every level of cloud architecture. For Instance a protocol which allows a machine's corresponding server execute the necessary quantum computation for it in a way that its inputs, outputs and computation remain perfectly private, eradicating its any requirements for private quantum computational power or memory, is given by the Blind quantum computing, which thereby complements the cloud security. The only requirement on the machine or client side is to prepare single qubits randomly chosen from a finite set and send them to the corresponding server with adequate quantum computational power.[\cite=broadbent2009universal]

With the advent of Quantum technology another issue that might need to be addressed is that due its high cost and maintainability, this quantum infrastructure will only be accessible to very few centres across the globe. The situation would be analogous to the one prevailing today with the limited resource provisioning of supercomputers to the selective clients. How will a client exploit this quantum resource without revealing the computation of the remote computer ? This Quantum computing challenge is fulfilled by the use of a cloud service wherein we use quantum infrastructure and deploy certain protocols of quantum computing. Hence, Cloud too complements the quantum computing.

Quantum Clouds

Before Analyzing the indispensable role of a quantum computer in a cloud, we need to understand the basic architecture of cloud in order to determine where in that architecture does our quantum computer fits ?

We have four layers in cloud which are as follows[\cite=zhang2010cloud]:

Corresponding to these architectural layers we have a Service-driven business model, wherein these resources are provided as services on an on-demand basis.[\cite=zhang2010cloud]

We know that cloud offers services in three categories[\cite=zhang2010cloud] :

Corresponding to these services and resources, on an abstract level we have a following business model of cloud computing comprising of an End user, a Service Provider (SaaS), and an Infrastructure Provider(IaaS, PaaS).

Now, in this model our Quantum Computer fits best on the most basic level, ie, forming the core hardware of the cloud. Correspondingly our Quantum Algorithms and Automata form subsequent levels. Hence, the answer to our question.

Now as per aim of this paper, we won’t be dwelling into the details of quantum computing or the cloud computing but only the relationships between these two that can help overcome the aforementioned limitations of the clouds. Also, we'll study the future perspective of the quantum clouds and the research challenges faced by this technology.[\cite=singh2014quantum]

Automated service provisioning

Starting with the Automated Service Provisioning, how would a quantum cloud be able to handle this research challenge of present clouds ? Automated Service Provisioning is about capability of cloud of acquiring and releasing resources on-demand. The objective of the a Service provider is to allocate and de-allocate resources from the cloud to satisfy its service level objectives (SLO’s). But the problem with this model is that to achieve high agility and to respond to rapid demand fluctuations in situations such as flash crowd effect, the resource provisioning decisions must be made online[\cite=farkas2007automated]. This comes at the cost of increased management overhead, to dynamically reconfigure software components on instant demand. Users request resources like Virtual Machines from cloud infrastructure providers but time needed to configure them becomes a limiting factor, potentially offsetting the advantages of flexible computing infrastructure. Therefore, looking objectively, problem boils down to Space and time efficiency or, memory and speed of computation. The quantum computer increases the memory and speed exponentially, thereby, providing solution to any challenge that boils down to these two factors.

Virtual Machine Migration and Traffic Management

Let's take an example of a computing environment containing a server with a hypervisor and corresponding virtual machines, each running an OS and applications. The availability of the application would be significantly affected in the case if you need to bring down the server for maintenance, for instance, in order to increase the memory because in that scenario you'll have to shut down the software components and restart them after the maintenance. This VM migration in clouds is fascilitated by allowing you to move an entire virtual machine along with its corresponding operating system and applications, from one machine to another and continue operation of the virtual machine on the second machine. This advantage is unique to virtualized environments as you can take down physical servers for maintenance with minimal effect on running applications. This migration can be performed after suspending the virtual machine on the source machine, moving its attendant information to the target machine and starting it on the target machine. In order to minimize the downtime, the migration is performed while the VM is running (hence the name "live migration") and its operations are resumed on the target machine after all the state is migrated.

Live migration, therefore, is done when the source machine goes down that can be due to either flash crowd effect or heating up of the components or various other technical gliches. The Quantum hardware enhances the capability of a cloud to handle any flash crowd at any time and to manage any traffic load effectively because of its immense processing and memory capabilities.A Quantum cloud can process multiple requests at a time owing to the principle of superposition of states and Quantum parallelism. Quantum parallelism is phenomenon used to perform multiple computations at the same time. Quantum Interfernce thereby, afterwards is used to collect and combine the results.

With the advent of cloud paradigm, live migration of multiple virtual machines have become much more pronounced and frequent. The live migration of multiple virtual machines, unlike the single virtual machine migrations, faces many new challenges such as the migration conflicts due to the concurrent migrations, migration failures due to the insufficient resources in target machine, and the migration thrashing due to the dynamic changes of virtual machine workloads. To maximize the migration efficiency in virtualized cloud data center environments, all the above issues need to be overcome.[\cite=vmmigration2]

Live migration of a virtual machine can also be supported by the phenomenon of Quantum entanglement. Quantum entanglement can parallely store a dynamic state of a virtual machine on another qubit and we just need to apply a quantum OR gate so that in case of server failure of the original machine the control could fetch data from a parallel entangled qubit residing in another server. Hence, in this case a virtual live migration is taking place. This process also eliminates any discrepancies and failures associated with the classical live migration.

Quantum paradigm also inculcates another phenomenon, Qauntum teleportation, by the virtue of which we can reproduce the same state of the qubits at a lab quite distant to the one we are operating in, avoiding any decoherence and without having any quantum channel in between, following a protocol known as quantum teleportation protocol. Therefore, this phenomenon cannot be simulated anyway in classical world, hence, such a kind of distant dynamic live migration of virtual machines can be accomplished in the quantum paradigm by deploying teleportation protocol.[\cite=teleportation]

Server Consolidation and Energy management

An effective approach to maximize resource utilization in a cloud environment, such that energy consumption is minimized is Server consolidation. Live Vm migration technology is used to consolidate virtual machines residing on multiple underutilised servers onto a single server, consequently remaining servers can be set to an energy-saving state. The issue of optimally consolidating servers in a data center can be observed as analogous to the vector bin-packing problem, which is an np hard optimization problem.[\cite=zhang2010cloud]

Shor's Quantum factoring algorithm solves the factoring problem which is also an np hard problem, thereby, laying up the groundwork for the solution of other np hard problems as well.[\cite=shor].A quantum hardware with 300 qubits is more powerful than all the supercomputers of the world put together. A silicon chip on a server consists of 3 million transistors on an average. The cost of running millions of transistors compared to few hundreds of qubits is very low once we develop appropriate technologies for a quantum computer. Therefore, server consolidation and energy management problems are addressed in quantum clouds.

Optimizing energy efficiency of servers is a considerable issue in cloud computing. Estimated data surveys have shown that the cost of energy management accounts for 53 percent of the total operational expenditure of data centres. Owing to the growing energy demands of the data centres, cloud infrastructure providers are under a significant amount of pressure to reduce energy consumption. For the same reason designing energy-efficient data centres has recieved considerable attention. This problem can be -approached from several directions in classical way in accordance with [\cite=zhang2010cloud].

The key challenge in above directions is to achieve a good trade-off between energy savings and application performance.

Quantum computing deploys reversible model model of computing Wherein the energy requirements are limited due to its reversible nature. [\cite=limits]This was first proposed by Neumann and was later studied by Benett and Landauer.It has been shown that any computation could be carried out reversibly, thereby preventing any unnecessary dissipation of heat, which is the main cause of high energy requirements of cloud servers. Hence, this issue of energy management is aptly addressed in qauntum paradigm as it fundamentally exploits the reversible nature of computation.Refer Landauer's principle and reversible computation for further insight.[\cite=landauer]

Data security

Data Security is among the most important research topic in cloud computing. Data security in quantum clouds is ensured using following protocols: SpecialItem

Limitations of Quantum Clouds

Quantum clouds inherit their limitations from the basic principles of Quantum mechanics.Some limitations are intrinsic to the nature of Quantum paradigm itself, for instance, No cloning theorem, heisenberg's uncertainity principle and others are practical or constraints of our present technology such as decoherence. Other limitations are induced by some present quantum algorithms, for instance, not all quantum algorithms are exponentially superior to classical ones as expected but some like searching the database with Grover's algortihm can provide quadratic speedup over the classical at the most[\cite=Vitanyi][\cite=aronson].

Research challenges in Quantum Clouds

Quantum technology is in yet its poineering stages, therefore having a significant amount of challenges which need to be addressed before it can be deployed on a larger scale.[\cite=Gruska]

Epilogue

Despite some research challenges, which yet need to be addressed, quantum clouds inevitably mark the dawn a computing era with unimaginable possibilities and computing ways which might as of right now seem grandiose. As feynman said we have turned the problem of quantum principles into an effect to incorporate those principles into computing realm.The success and excitement of this forseeable futuristic technology is even enhanced by the evidence that it is filling up the voids left by classical computing models.

Cloud computing is among the frontier models of classical computing and deploying quantum paradigm in this arena is of utmost importance.The state of the art problems and challenges currently faced by the clouds, for instance, automatic service provisioning, VM migration, traffic management,Server consolidation and data security are addressed by the introduction of quantum mechanical principles.

In layman terms, whenever we think of future technology, we manifest a picture wherein we have thin and extremely revolutionary computing gadgets with enormous computation power. Quantum clouds is basically a step in that direction which propagates the jist of computing in which exponential computation power will reside at the server(a quantum cloud model) and device will just be requiring a connection to that.

Though having great advantages, this quantum clouds too suffer from "drawbacks" as of now. The actual implementation is still way down the road.We need to address the problems of decoherence, measurement, development of quantum processors, and discover effective ways for information processing.

Ultimately, research is still going on at an appreciable pace, hence the question now is not IF quantum clouds will be there, but the actual question is WHEN ?

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Mr Umesh Vazirani for inspiring me and motivating me in this field. It was after watching his lectures online, i developed passion in this arena. Ms.Karamjeet Kaur Cheema, for her guidance in cloud computing. Mr Ajay Kumar Laura, for his guidance in theory of computation. Mr Anil Kumar Verma , for his support and driving me towards research.