SLAC-PUB-6263 June 1993 T/E

Heavy Quark Symmetry

Matthias Neubert Stanford Linear Accelerator Center Stanford University, Stanford, California 94309

(to appear in Physics Reports)

Preface

A scan through the Review of Particle Properties gives an impression of the great variety of phenomena caused by the weak interactions. Attempts to understand this rich phenomenology have led to much progress in particle physics. Today, the standard model of the strong and electroweak interactions provides a most successful description of the physics currently accessible with particle accelerators. In spite of its success, however, many open questions remain. In particular, a large number of undetermined parameters are associated with the flavor sector of the theory. These parameters are the quark and lepton masses, as well as the four angles of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix, which describes the mixing of the mass eigenstates of the quarks under the weak interactions. Quite obviously, weak decays offer the most direct way to determine these mixing angles and to test the flavor sector of the standard model. But they are also ideally suited for a study of that part of strong interaction physics which is least understood: the nonperturbative long-distance forces, which are responsible for the confinement of quarks and gluons into hadrons. Indeed, these two aspects cannot be separated from each other. An understanding of the connection between quark and hadron properties is a prerequisite for a precise determination of the parameters of the standard model.

In many instances this puts important limitations on the amount of information that can be deduced from weak interaction experiments at low energies. The theoretical description of hadron properties often relies on very naive bound state models with no direct connection to the underlying theory of quantum chromodynamics (QCD). Indeed, at low energies this theory has proved so intractable to analytical approaches that reliable predictions can only be made based on symmetries. A well-known example is chiral symmetry, which arises since the current masses of the light quarks are small compared to the intrinsic mass scale of the strong interactions given, say, by the mass of the proton. It is then useful to consider, as a first approximation, the limiting case of nf massless quarks, in which the theory has an SUL(nf)  ×  SUR(nf) chiral symmetry, which is spontaneously broken to SUV(nf). Associated with this is a set of massless goldstone bosons. This symmetry pattern persists in the presence of small mass terms for the quarks. The goldstone bosons, which also acquire small masses due to these perturbations, can be identified with the light pseudoscalar mesons. The low energy theorems of current algebra predict relations between the scattering and decay amplitudes for processes involving a different number of these particles, and chiral perturbation theory provides the modern framework for a systematic analysis of the symmetry breaking corrections. This is quite a powerful concept, which allows predictions from first principles in an energy regime where the standard perturbative approach to quantum field theory, i.e. an expansion in powers of the coupling constant, breaks down. A nice illustration is provided by the calculation of the matrix element of the flavor-changing vector current between a kaon and a pion state. The Ademollo-Gatto theorem states that, at zero momentum transfer, the corresponding form factor is normalized up to corrections which are of second order in the symmetry breaking parameter ms - mu. Chiral perturbation theory can be used to calculate the leading corrections in an expansion in the light quark masses in a model independent way. From such an analysis the form factor can be predicted with an accuracy of 1%. This makes it possible to obtain a very precise determination of the element Vus of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa matrix from an analysis of the semileptonic decay [formula].

Recently, it has become clear that a similar situation arises in the opposite limit of very large quark masses. When the Compton wave length 1 / mQ of a heavy quark bound inside a hadron is much smaller than a typical hadronic distance of about 1 fm, the heavy quark mass is unimportant for the low energy properties of the state. The strong interactions of such a heavy quark with light quarks and gluons can be described by an effective theory, which is invariant under changes of the flavor and spin of the heavy quark. This "heavy quark symmetry" leads to similar predictions than chiral symmetry. In the limit 1 / mQ  →  0, relations between decay amplitudes for processes involving different heavy quarks arise, and matrix elements of the flavor-changing weak currents become normalized at the point of zero velocity transfer. There is even an analog of the Ademollo-Gatto theorem: In certain cases the leading symmetry breaking corrections are of second order in 1 / mQ. The existence of an exact symmetry limit of the theory increases the prospects for a precise determination of the element Vcb of the quark mixing matrix. Ultimately, it can help to promote the description of weak decays of hadrons containing a heavy quark from the level of naive quark models to a theory of strong interactions. The hope is to start from the model independent relations that are valid in the limit of infinite heavy quark masses, and to include the leading symmetry breaking corrections in an expansion in 1 / mQ. The theoretical framework for such an analysis is provided by the so-called heavy quark effective theory.

In this review we present the current status of heavy quark symmetry and of the heavy quark effective theory, with emphasis on the weak decays of hadrons containing a single heavy quark. For these processes the theory has already been developed to an extent which is no less elaborate than, e.g., the modern formulation of chiral perturbation theory. In particular, the symmetry breaking corrections have been analyzed in great detail, and many quantitative predictions of sometimes remarkable accuracy can be made. This review can be divided into four parts: In the first two chapters we present the physical picture and the ideas behind heavy quark symmetry in an intuitive, introductory way. Similar introductions have been given by Georgi, Grinstein, Isgur and Wise, and Mannel. They were very helpful in preparing the material for these chapters. The second part (Chapters 3 and 4) is devoted to a very detailed and comprehensive description of the formalism of heavy quark effective theory, and of the state of the art in the analysis of symmetry breaking corrections. The discussion of these topics is necessarily more advanced and, with the exception of the introductory sections 3.1-3.4 and 4.1-4.3, addresses the experts in the field. Some of the results presented in these chapters have not even been published so far. In particular, we present for the first time the complete expressions for meson and baryon weak decay amplitudes to order 1 / mQ in the heavy quark expansion, and to next-to-leading order in QCD perturbation theory. The third part consists of Chapter 5, in which we discuss nonperturbative techniques which aim at a dynamical, QCD-based calculation of hadronic matrix elements. We give a general introduction to the QCD sum rule approach of Shifman, Vainshtein, and Zakharov, which might help readers not familiar with this subject to get an appreciation of the physical motivations of the method. In the subsequent sections we present many interesting results that have been obtained recently by applying the sum rule technique to the heavy quark effective theory. In the last part (Chapter 6) we come back to the phenomenological applications of heavy quark symmetry. We present a comprehensive analysis of semileptonic B meson decays in the context of the new theoretical framework provided by the heavy quark effective theory. The virtue of this approach is that model independent aspects of the analysis can be clearly separated from model dependent ones. Ultimately, this might help to change the perspective in heavy quark phenomenology from a comparison of the data with models to a language which deals with certain types of corrections in a well-defined expansion in QCD. This would be a significant development.