Dip. di Fisica Teorica, Università di Torino and INFN, sez. di Torino, Italy Dip. di Genetica, Biologia e Biochimica, Università di Torino, Italy Dip. di Scienze e Tecnologie Avanzate, Università del Piemonte Orientale and INFN, gruppo collegato di Alessandria, Italy

Introduction

One of the most interesting subjects of computational genomics is the characterization of the network of regulatory interactions between genes. A dominant role in this web of interactions is played by the mechanism of transcriptional regulation, in which one or more gene products regulate the transcription of other genes into mRNA, by binding to recognition motifs (short DNA sequences) generally located upstream of the coding region of the regulated gene. A key step in the study of transcriptional regulation is the identification of such recognition motifs.

In recent years, it has become possible to attack this problem on a genomic scale with computational methods, thanks to the huge amount of data generated by modern experimental techniques. In particular, two sets of experimental data are of utmost importance to the study of transcriptional regulation: first, the availability of the complete, annotated DNA sequence for many model organisms allows the systematic exploration of the upstream regions where the motifs are to be found; second, microrarray techniques allow the identification of groups of coregulated genes.

When trying to identify regulatory motifs within a computational approach, one is interested in finding instances of statistical correlation between the presence of certain sequences in the upstream region and common patterns of expression. This search is facilitated by the fact that, in many cases, the regulatory motif must be repeated several times in the upstream region to be effective, and therefore the number of its appearances in the upstream region is above what expected from chance alone. The most common approach to the problem consists in two steps: first, a set of co-expressed genes is identified, either using direct experimental knowledge or by applying clustering techniques to microarray data; then the upstream region of such genes are systematically analyzed, looking for motifs that are overrepresented in some statistically precise sense. Examples of this procedure as applied to yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) are Refs. [\cite=DeRisi:1997] [\cite=vanHelden:1998] [\cite=Tavazoie:1999].

In this work we propose an alternative procedure, which in some sense reverses the procedure: the genes are grouped based on the short sequences that are overrepresented in their upstream region, and such groups are then tested for evidence of coregulation, using microarray data. Whenever such evidence of coregulation is found, the sequence characterizing the upstream region of the genes is a candidate regulatory site. The most attractive feature of this reversed procedure is that the grouping of the genes is based on the sequence only: the sets of genes thus obtained can be analysed for evidence of coregulation not only by using microarray data, as described in this contribution, but also by comparing them to other biological data, such as e.g. functional annotation and the composition of protein complexes.

A somewhat related method, that does not rely on previous clustering of the genes, is described in Ref. [\cite=Bussemaker:2001]. In this contribution we focus on describing the method: for a detailed discussion of the results and comparison with other methods, we refer the interested reader to the original paper, Ref.[\cite=Caselle:2002].

Grouping the genes based on overrepresented upstream motifs

The first step in our procedure consists in analyzing the upstream region of all the ~  6000 yeast genes, and identify for each gene the short DNA sequences (words) which are overrepresented in their upstream region. Overrepresentation of a word in the upstream sequence of a gene is defined by comparison to the prevalence of the same word in all the upstream regions taken as a single sample.

Specifically, for each possible word w (of length 6-8 in the present study) we construct the set S(w) of the genes in whose upstream region w is overrepresented by the following procedure:

For each yeast gene g we compute the number mg(w) of occurrences of w in the upstream region of g. The length of the upstream region we consider is 500 base pairs, but is shortened whenever necessary to avoid overlapping with the coding region of the preceding open reading frame (ORF). Therefore the length of the coding region depends on the gene considered, and will be denoted by Kg. Non palindromic words are counted on both strands: therefore we define the effective number of occurrences ng(w) as

[formula]

where w̃ is the reverse complement of w.

We define the global frequency p(w) of each word w as

[formula]

where, in order to count correctly the available space for palindromic and non palindromic words,

[formula]

where l is the length of w. p(w) is therefore the frequency with which the word w appears in the upstream regions of the whole genome: it is the "background frequency" against which occurrences in the upstream regions of the individual genes are compared to determine which words are overrepresented.

For each ORF g and each word w we compute the probability bg(w) of finding ng(w) or more occurrences of w based on the global frequency p(w):

[formula]

We define a maximum probability P and consider, for each w, the set

[formula]

of the ORFs in which the word w is overrepresented compared to the frequency of w in the upstream regions of the whole genome. That is, w is considered overrepresented in the upstream region of g if the probability of finding ng(w) or more instances of w based on the global frequency is less than P. In this study we chose P = 0.02. Note that this is a rather lenient cutoff: however no biological significance is attributed to the set S(w) in itself: only those sets which will pass the test for coregulation, described in the following section, will be considered of biological relevance, and hence it is on this second test that a stringent cutoff on P-value must be imposed.

Looking for coregulation within the sets S(w)

The second step of the procedure consists in verifying whether the genes contained in each set S(w) show evidence of coregulation in their expression levels as measured in microarray experiments. This is done by computing the average expression level of the genes in the set and comparing it to the average expression level for the same experiment computed over the whole genome. We used the data from the diauxic shift experiment of Ref.[\cite=DeRisi:1997] which provides us with expression measurements for virtually all the yeast genes at 7 timepoints corresponding to progressive depletion of the glucose in the medium, with the consequent metabolic shift form fermentation to respiration. We proceed as follows:

For each time-point i we computed the genome-wide average expression R(i) and its standard deviation σ(i).

Then for each word w we compute the average expression in the subset of Sw given by the genes for which an experimental result is available at timepoint i (in most cases this coincides with Sw):

[formula]

where N(i,w) is the number of ORFs in Sw for which an experimental result at timepoint i is available, and rg(i) is the corresponding expression level (as customary, this is defined as the log 2 of the ratio between the mRNA level at timepoint i and the initial mRNA level).

The difference

[formula]

represents the discrepancy between the genome-wide average expression at time-point i and the average expression at the same time-point of the ORFs that share an abundance of the word w in their upstream region.

A significance index sig(i,w) is defined as

[formula]

and the word w is considered significantly correlated with expression at time point i if

[formula]

In this work we chose Λ = 6: this means that we consider meaningful a deviation of Rw(i) by six s.d.'s from its expected value. The sign of sig(i,w) indicates whether w acts as an enhancer or an inhibitor of gene expression.

Results

A total of 29 words of length between 6 and 8 base pairs pass our significativity test for at least one timepoint in the diauxic shift experiment. Two of them must be eliminated as their statistical significance can be ascribed to the existence of a family of several nearly identical ORFs with nearly identical upstream regions. Out of the remaining 27 words, 26 can be confidently identified with a known regulatory motif, and one word is a new candidate. Examples of significant words, including the new candidate ATAAGGG, are reported in Tab. [\ref=tab:results].

In Figs. [\ref=figure:gatgag1] and [\ref=figure:gatgag2] , we give an example of coregulation in the set S(w) corresponding to the significant word GATGAG

Conclusions

Our method appears to be very efficient in identifying regulatory motifs whose effectiveness depend on many repetitions of a short sequence in the upstream region of the regulated genes. The main feature that differentiates our method from existing algorithms for motif discovery is the fact that genes are grouped a priori based on similarities in their upstream sequences. The fact that most of the motif revealed by the method turn out to be known regulatory motifs suggests a very low rate of false positives. Also in Ref.[\cite=Bussemaker:2001] a computational method was proposed in which candidate binding sites are identified using statistical correlations between upstream sequence and expression data. Two important differences can be identified between our method and the one proposed in Ref.[\cite=Bussemaker:2001] (see Ref.[\cite=Caselle:2002] for a detailed comparison of the results): first, our algorithm does not assume a linear dependence of the expression level from the number of repetitions of the motif. Second, our sets of genes, being based on the upstream sequence only, can be screened for evidence of coregulation not only by comparison with expression data, as described above, but also with other types of biological datasets, such as functional annotation or experimentally determined protein complexes.