=

1.25in .125in .25in

Phase-resolved spectra of the millisecond pulsar SAX J1808.4-3658

The X-ray spectrum of the millisecond pulsar can be fitted by a two-component model consisting of a soft blackbody and a hard Comptonization, with weak Compton reflection. We attribute the soft component to the hotspot on the neutron star and the hard component to a plasma heated in the accretion shock as the material collimated by the magnetic field impacts onto the surface. The soft and hard fluxes are tightly correlated, so probably the hotspot is due to reprocessing of the kinetic energy of the accretion flow and hard X-ray irradiation. The geometry advocated here (see Figure [\ref=fig:ns]) implies that the hotspot is the dominant source of seed photons for Comptonization in the shock, while the seed photons from the disc or self-absorbed synchrotron are negligible.

In the phase-resolved spectra the two components pulse independently, retaining their spectral shape as a function of spin phase. The constancy of the hard X-ray spectral shape implies that the hard X-rays are from a single emission region, rather than being the sum of a spatially separated pulsed and unpulsed components. The large amplitude of variability of the hotspot (see Figure [\ref=fig:phase_param]a) implies large inclination of the system, ~  60 deg , if the angle between spin and magnetic axes is small (~  10 deg ). Lack of secondary maxima in both profiles implies that we do not see the second magnetic pole - neither the hotspot nor the shock. This, in turn, constrains the shock height to be less than ~   10% of the neutron star radius. The pulse profiles of the soft and hard components and are shifted in phase by about 50 deg  (Figure [\ref=fig:phase_param]). The soft blackbody component is optically thick, so its variability is dominated by its changing projected area, while the Doppler shifts (which are maximised 90 deg  before the maximum in projected area) are somewhat stronger for the translucent accreting shock. This phase shift will manifest itself as the observed energy-dependent time lag in which soft photons lags hard ones. A skewness of the hard component pulse profile (Figure [\ref=fig:phase_param]a) can be a sign of an elongated cross-section of the shock.

The inner disc radius, ~  20-40 Rg, derived from the amount of reflection is consistent with that derived from the relativistic disc models for the origin of the QPO and break in the power density spectra. The evolution of the inner radius is not consistent with the magnetic field truncating the disc. Instead it seems more likely that the inner disc radius is set by some much longer time-scale process connected to the overall evolution of the accretion disc. This disc truncation mechanism would then have to be generic in all low mass accretion rate flows both in disc accreting neutron stars and black hole systems.