=

1.25in .125in .25in

The 1 Ms Chandra Survey of the : Populations at the Faintest X-ray Fluxes

Introduction: The Chandra Deep Field-North Survey

Our team is in the process of making an extremely deep survey of the Hubble Deep Field North (hereafter ) and its environs with the Advanced CCD Imaging Spectrometer on board the Chandra X-ray Observatory. This is one of the two deepest X-ray surveys ever performed; for point sources near the aim point it reaches 0.5-2.0 keV and 2-8 keV flux limits of ≈  3  ×  10- 17 erg cm- 2 s- 1 and ≈  2  ×  10- 16 erg cm- 2 s- 1, respectively. Within the [formula] area (referred to as the Chandra Deep Field-North region, hereafter the ""), 370 point sources and several extended sources are detected in the ACIS data. The 0.5-8 keV adaptively smoothed image of the field is shown in Figure 1. The detailed analysis of the data is described in the catalog paper Brandt et al. (2001b; hereafter referred to as Paper V).

Figure 1 shows the outline of the within the , which comprises about 2% of the entire field. There are 15 X-ray sources detected in the this region (Paper V). These sources span a wide range of properties, with 0.5-2 keV rest frame luminosities between ≈  2  ×  1039 erg s- 1 and ≈  5  ×  1044 erg s- 1, redshifts from z = 0.089 to z = 3.479, and a range of X-ray hardness ratios.

Figure 2 places the 1 Ms survey into scientific perspective. Shown are a variety of 0.5-2 keV X-ray surveys (chosen to be representative, not complete!). The flattening of the number counts is apparent as the net gain in number of sources per unit solid angle decreases at the faintest fluxes. One might find this flattening of the number counts discouraging, but in fact these faintest fluxes are quite tantalizing, for it is here that we reach the limits necessary to detect the most distant and most numerous classes of X-ray emitters.

The most distant are perhaps extreme redshift (z  >  6) quasars, a population which was emitting X-rays very soon after the dawn of the modern Universe. These extremely distant objects are expected to be fairly optically faint, and studying them was one of the motivating factors for a comprehensive examination of optically faint (I  >  24) sources within the 1 Ms survey by Alexander et al. 2001 (hereafter Paper VI). A fair fraction of the X-ray background (15-30%) at the fainter flux levels is accounted for by these optically faint sources, and it is in this region of parameter space that one would expect z  >  6 quasars to live.

The most numerous are "normal" galaxies where X-ray binaries, hot ISM, and supernovae contribute as much or more to the X-ray luminosity as accretion onto a nuclear black hole (Hornschemeier et al. 2001, hereafter Paper II and references therein; Brandt et al. 2001a, hereafter Paper IV). These sources typically have X-ray luminosities of 1039-1041 erg s- 1, which can be reached to [formula] in ≈  1 Ms Chandra observations. It is predicted through modelling and through statistical analysis of the data that the typical spiral galaxy will be detected in the 0.5-2 keV band at flux levels of ≈  5  ×  10- 18 erg cm- 2 s- 1 (Ptak et al. 2001; A. E. Hornschemeier et al., in prep; hereafter Paper VIII) and that normal galaxies will account for ≈  5% of the soft X-ray background.

In this contribution to the ASP Sharp Focus proceedings, I discuss both the optically faint (possibly z  >  6) and the optically bright (low z normal galaxies) classes of X-ray sources, the reader is encouraged to consult the relevant papers for more details.

Neither of these source populations (optically faint sources and "normal" galaxies) are particularly unexpected from an observational point of view. Most of the X-ray background flux is explained by active galaxies, which have been observed to typically exist within a well-defined range of X-ray-to-optical flux ratios (Schmidt et al. 1998). Thus, if one extends this trend to faint X-ray fluxes, the optical counterparts predicted are indeed quite optically faint (see Figure 3). Below 0.5-2 keV fluxes of ≈  1  ×  10- 15 erg cm- 2 s- 1, a source population is seen to arise with X-ray-to-optical flux ratios lower than typically seen in AGN populations, this is simply due to the flux limits being sufficiently low to detect non-AGN activity at low-to-moderate redshift (z  <  1).

Optically Faint (I  >  24) X-ray Sources

A detailed analysis of optically faint ([formula]) X-ray sources identified within the 1 Ms exposure has been made in Paper VI. In this paper, we studied an [formula] region within the Hawaii flanking-field area containing the Hubble Deep Field North region. Analysis of the optical and X-ray properties suggests a large number of these optically faint X-ray sources are likely to host obscured AGN activity at z =  1-3 (Paper VI).

The X-ray flux distribution of the optically faint sources is consistent with that of the optically bright source population, indicating that this population does not suddenly arise below some faint X-ray flux level. Their X-ray-to-optical flux ratios are consistent with AGN in the local Universe (see Figure 3). Their fairly red optical colors are not consistent with these objects being unobscured broad-line AGN and, as a population, they have flatter X-ray slopes on average than the optically bright sources (Paper VI). Note that while on average they are X-ray harder, they are not all X-ray hard; there is at least one apparently normal broad-line AGN within the optically faint population studied in Paper VI. However, the majority of the optically faint X-ray sources are consistent with being obscured AGN (Paper VI).

Obscured AGN have their optical emission dominated in most cases by the host galaxy and this property can be used to place constraints on source redshifts. In Figure 4 (adapted from Paper VI), SED tracks of I-band magnitude vs. redshift are plotted, showing the way in which different classes of objects become fainter at increasing redshift. We expect that obscured AGN and fairly normal galaxies will follow the SED tracks for the Sc, Sa, or E type galaxies rather than the QSO SED. Overplotted are the data showing the average spectroscopic redshifts for the optically bright population, excluding the confirmed broad-line AGN: these X-ray sources do indeed follow the SED tracks of normal galaxies. One can then extend these tracks to fainter optical magnitudes to place some constraints on their redshifts. It is found that for I  >  24, one expects the objects to have z =  1-3. For the few optically faint sources with either photometric or spectroscopic redshifts, this appears to hold reasonably well (Paper VI).

Extreme redshift QSOs (z  >  6) would not only be optically faint but "optically blank" even in the very deep (I  ≈  25.3) optical imaging data of the due to the Lyman break entering the I-band at z  ≈  6. Within the area under study in Paper VI, there were only 15 sources having no counterparts down to I  ≈  25.3 (≈  10% of the sources). Based on a simple hierarchial cold dark matter model and using constraints from the QSO X-ray luminosity function, Haiman & Loeb (1999) predicted ≈  15 QSOs (i.e., LX > 1044 erg s- 1) at z  >  6 at the depth and area of our survey. While this is comparable to the number of optically blank sources detected, for several reasons described in Paper VI, it is likely that most of the optically blank X-ray sources lie at similar redshifts to the optically faint X-ray sources and hence at z < 6. We are thus placing the first significant constraints on this population and are currently not finding evidence for a large population of extremely high redshift AGN.

Optically Bright X-ray Sources: Constraints on Normal Galaxies

Galaxies at 0.3  <  z  <  2.0: Probing the X-ray Response to the Star-Formation Peak

The has reached the depths necessary to detect fairly normal galaxies to [formula] (see Figure 5 for an example), or look-back times of several Gyr. Although these normal galaxies comprise only 10-15% of the soft-band sources in the survey, it is expected that they will dominate the number counts at 0.5-2 keV fluxes of ≈  1  ×  10- 17-1  ×  10- 18 erg cm- 2 s- 1 (Ptak et al. 2001). The emission mechanisms in the galaxies detected thus far are quite diverse: several are dominated by ultra-luminous off-nuclear X-ray sources which are most likely binaries, other show signs of being low-luminosity AGN, whereas the typical galaxy has an X-ray hardness ratio consistent with binary populations (Paper II; Tozzi et al. 2001; A.E. Hornschemeier et al., in preparation).

It is expected that the X-ray luminosity per unit B-band luminosity for normal galaxies will increase at z  ≈  0.5-1 due to the production of X-ray binaries from [formula]-3 (e.g., Ghosh & White 2001; Ptak et al. 2001). It is possible to test this expectation despite the anticipated extremely faint X-ray flux of the typical galaxy by stacking the data from individually undetected galaxies. We have empirically assessed the stacking false-detection probabilities by performing Monte-Carlo simulations designed to reproduce the actual stacking as closely as possible. Figure 6 shows an example of 100,000 such trials, the resulting distribution is closely Gaussian and this particular stacking result was expected for less than 1 of those 100,000 trials, indicating a highly significant (i.e., 99.999% confidence) average detection (see Paper IV for more details).

These stacking analyses have allowed us to study samples of spiral galaxies within the and its environs; we have found the typical spiral galaxy is detected at 0.5-2 keV X-ray fluxes of ≈  (3-5)×  10- 18 erg cm- 2 s- 1 (Paper VIII). The X-ray to B-band luminosity ratios, which indicate the level of current and recent star-formation activity in a normal galaxy, are found to not evolve upwards by more than a factor of ≈  2 to z  ≈  1 (Paper IV, Paper VIII) but some upwards evolution is detected by z  ≈  2. Since different global star-formation rates can lead to very different X-ray luminosity evolution profiles (e.g. Ghosh & White 2001), these constraints on evolution of galaxies in the X-ray band are a useful independent probe of the cosmic star-formation history. For more details, please see Paper VIII.

Galaxies at 2  <  z  <  4: Lyman Break Galaxies

Over the last few years, the Lyman break technique has been used extensively to isolate galaxies at z  ≈   2-4 (e.g., Steidel et al. 1996; Lowenthal et al. 1997; Dickinson 1998) and hence observe activity near the peak of the cosmic star-formation rate (e.g., Blain et al. 1999). Lyman break galaxies often exhibit stellar and interstellar absorption lines characteristic of local starburst galaxies, and have B-band luminosities somewhat larger than present-day [formula]. Their morphologies are varied, with multiple knots of emission and diffuse wispy tails that suggest nonrelaxed systems.

We selected galaxies within the with z = 2-4 for stacking analysis using the available spectroscopic redshift catalogs (e.g. Cohen et al. 2000; see references in Paper VII); there are 28 such objects, and most were found using the Lyman break technique (the HST U300 filter has allowed Lyman break galaxies to be found down to z  ≈  2 in the ; e.g., Dickinson 1998). The stacked images have effective exposure times of 22.4 Ms (260 days) and the average rest-frame 2-8 keV luminosity of a Lyman break galaxy is derived to be ≈  3.2  ×  1041 erg s- 1, comparable to that of the most X-ray luminous starbursts in the local Universe. The observed ratio of X-ray to B-band luminosity is consistent with that seen from local starbursts. The X-ray emission probably arises from a combination of high-mass X-ray binaries, "super-Eddington" X-ray sources, and low-luminosity active galactic nuclei (see Paper VII).

The Future

Members of the team (A. Barger and L. Cowie) are obtaining extremely deep wide-field optical and near-infrared coverage and will be able to further the analysis performed in Paper VI. The optically faint X-ray source population should be better constrained by using the properties of the multi-band optical photometry to obtain photometric redshifts.

The stacking results show that Chandra ACIS performs well at source detection even with effective exposure times of 260 days. Any systematic effects that cause the sensitivity to deviate from that expected by photon statistics appear mild. Stacking analyses using deeper observations with Chandra will allow this work to be extended.

The survey will go to 2 Ms of coverage over the course of the next year and the ultimate goal is to obtain 5 Ms of coverage over the next ≈  5 years. This is an ambitious project and will fulfill one of Chandra's central design goals and become a long-lasting (≈  20 year) legacy of Chandra, laying the groundwork for the next generation of X-ray telescopes. XEUS and Generation-X are designed to detect sources to ~  10- 18 erg cm- 2 s- 1 and perform X-ray spectroscopy on sources to ~  10- 17 erg cm- 2 s- 1. A 5 Ms Chandra observation will detect sources to ≈  10- 17 erg cm- 2 s- 1. These observations will bolster the scientific cases for these missions, not due to be operational for 15-20 years, and will be invaluable when planning their design.