=

1.25in .125in .25in

A Comparative Study of Damped Lyα Galaxies

Introduction

One of the future challenges in the field of galaxy formation research will be to self-consistently determine and understand the redshift evolution of the various global parameters which describe the conversion of gas into stars on a cosmological scale: galaxy number counts as a function of color, the (ionized, atomic, molecular) gas masses, star formation rates, and metallicities including dust content. However, in order to accomplish self-consistency, it will be necessary to determine many of these parameters for a common set of objects, so that the biases introduced by any single method used to take a census are clear. Here we discuss work along these lines with the aim of studying the galaxies associated with the bulk of the neutral hydrogen component in the Universe. As previous studies have shown, this component can be traced through the study of damped Lyα (DLA) systems in QSO spectra.

With the discovery of a moderate number of low-redshift (z < 1.65) DLA systems facilitated by HST UV spectroscopy (Rao & Turnshek 2000), it is now possible to undertake meaningful studies of the galaxies associated with these systems (e.g. Turnshek et al. 2001 and references therein). Some of the results of this work can be summarized as follows: (1) The low-redshift cosmological mass density of neutral gas contributed by DLA systems, and to a lesser extent their incidence, is higher than was expected, although the errors are still large. (2) The observed HI column density distribution of the low-redshift DLA systems has an excess of higher column density systems in comparison to what would be expected if the column densities were derived from a sample of randomly-oriented local gas-rich (disk) galaxies. (3) The low-redshift DLA galaxies are not limited to luminous disk galaxies, but rather they include a significant number of dwarf (L  <  0.1L*) and low surface brightness galaxies.

In these proceedings, Rao & Turnshek (2001) and Nestor et al. (2001) have reviewed these and other results on the evolution of DLA systems and presented images of associated DLA galaxies, respectively. Thus, our remaining aim for these proceedings is to review in more detail how the properties of identified low-redshift DLA galaxies compare with local galaxies. In the data and methods we use to assess the properties of local galaxies and low-redshift DLA galaxies are summarized. In we perform a comparative study of some of their properties. In we discuss the conclusions that can be drawn from the comparisons. When needed, cosmological parameters of H0  =  65 km s- 1, q0  =  0.5, and Λ  =  0 are adopted for ease of comparison with published results.

Data

Local Galaxies

Since the identification of a classical DLA absorption line requires an HI column density [formula] atoms cm- 2, we are naturally interested in those local (z = 0) galaxies which have substantial neutral gas components. In particular, we are interested in the properties of those local galaxies that would give rise to classical DLA systems if they were observed in front of background QSOs. Thus, to perform a comparative study between local galaxies and low-redshift DLA galaxies, it is necessary to define a sample of local galaxies with well-studied neutral hydrogen properties.

As our starting point for the comparative analysis, we used the sample of 27 local galaxies studied by Rao & Briggs (1993). Their sample was selected from Nilson's (1973) Uppsala General Catalog of Galaxies (i.e. the UGC). The UGC reaches a limiting diameter of ≈  1 arcmin and/or a limiting apparent magnitude of ≈  14.5 mag on the blue Palomar Observatory Sky Survey plates. Coverage on the sky is limited to north of declination - 2.5 deg. The study by Cornell et al. (1987) has shown that the B magnitude surface brightness limits used to estimate the galaxy major-axis diameters in the UGC vary considerably, but mostly lie between 25.0 and 26.5 mag arcsec- 2. Rao & Briggs (1993) considered all objects in the UGC catalog larger than 7 arcmin on the sky within the Arecibo declination range with velocities >  200 km s- 1. The velocity constraint was used to exclude members of the Local Group.

The program to obtain 21 cm observations of the 27 local galaxies was initiated by Briggs et al. (1980) and later analysis of these observations was used to estimate the equivalent incidence and cosmological mass density of DLA systems at z = 0 (Rao & Briggs 1993); the errors in these determinations were later slightly revised (Rao, Turnshek, & Briggs 1995). For random orientations, we have determined this sample's cross-section as a function of galaxy luminosity (MB) for [formula] atoms cm- 2 (upper panel of Figure 1). Then, using the local luminosity function of Tammann (1986, middle panel of Figure 1), which was adopted by Rao & Briggs (1993), we have derived a cross-section weighted luminosity function for local (z = 0) DLA galaxies (lower panel of Figure 1); this represents the relative probability that a local galaxy of a given luminosity will give rise to a classical DLA line. Our result is similar to a result derived from 21 cm emission observations of the Ursa Major cluster and presented by Zwaan at this workshop. We also show the distribution of radii corresponding to [formula] atoms cm- 2 (Figure 2) for the z = 0 sample when viewed face-on; only 24 of the 27 galaxies have regions with [formula] atoms cm- 2 when viewed face-on. The upper envelope of this distribution gives an indication of the expected near-maximum value of the impact parameter as a function of luminosity for local (z = 0) DLA galaxies.

Low-Redshift DLA Galaxies

At the present time there are ≈  12 QSO fields with ≈  13 low-redshift (z < 1) DLA systems that have been imaged with the goal of identifying the associated DLA galaxies and studying their properties. The average redshift of this sample is <   z   >    =  0.5. It should be kept in mind that the degree of confidence for any "identification" of a DLA galaxy is variable, with the confidence being highest when the candidate DLA galaxy has a low impact parameter along the QSO sight-line and there is a confirming slit spectrum showing that it is at the DLA system redshift. However, even when the confidence is relatively high, it is possible that some other galaxy, possibly a fainter galaxy or a galaxy with a smaller impact parameter, might be the actual DLA absorber.

As a rule, three methods have been used to make a DLA galaxy identification: (1) a slit redshift, (2) a photometric redshift, and/or (3) simply the existence of an isolated galaxy at relatively low impact parameter along the QSO sight-line. See Turnshek et al. (2001) and Nestor et al. (2001) for examples of the first two methods and Le Brun et al. (1997) for examples of the third method. The results of the identifications for 13 low-redshift DLA galaxies are shown in Figure 3. Provided in this figure is the 3-dimensional distribution of DLA galaxy luminosity (MB), impact parameter (b), and neutral hydrogen column density (NHI) for the 13 identifications.

Comparison of z = 0 and <   z   >    =  0.5 DLA Galaxies

As alluded to previously, we know that DLA survey results suggest that the incidence and cosmological mass density of low-redshift DLA systems are larger in comparison to expectations at z = 0 by factors of ~  3 and ~  6.5, respectively, although the errors in these determinations are substantial (Rao & Turnshek 2000 and 2001). Here we compare three properties of the local (z = 0) galaxy sample with the low-redshift (<   z   >    =  0.5) DLA galaxy sample. First, in Figure 4 we compare the normalized luminosity distributions of the two samples; we see that if we ignore the corresponding information on impact parameter and column density for the time being, these two luminosity distributions show overall agreement. Second, in Figure 5 we show the luminosity dependence of how the impact parameters of the low-redshift DLA galaxies compare with the face-on radii of local galaxies for [formula] atoms cm- 2. There appears to be some level of agreement here as well, after one considers the affects of imposing random orientations on the local galaxy sample and inferring the most probable impact parameter for a DLA system identification. We note that the probability of producing a DLA line when b  >  R20.3 is relatively small (but not zero) for inclined galaxies. Lastly, however, we present Figure 6 and draw attention to figure 4 in Rao & Turnshek (2001) in these proceedings and figures 32 - 34 in Rao & Turnshek (2000). The results shown in these figures indicate that, to a high level of significance, the column density distribution of low-redshift (z < 1.65) DLA survey systems is markedly different from that derived for the z = 0 galaxy sample. In particular, as seen in the upper panel of Figure 6, there is a strong relative excess of higher column density (NHI  >  1021 atoms cm- 2) systems among the low-redshift (z < 1.65) DLA systems studied by Rao & Turnshek (2000); however, this effect is not readily apparent in the low-redshift (<   z   >    =  0.5) sample of 13 DLA galaxies studied here (Figures 3 - 5 and the lower panel of Figure 6), which required imaging data to obtain luminosities and impact parameters. This sample of 13 overlaps with, but is not identical to, the larger sample studied in Rao & Turnshek (2000), which only required neutral hydrogen column density information. Therefore, it should be kept in mind that we probably have not yet studied a representative sample of the DLA galaxies which give rise to the highest column density systems.

Conclusions and Discussion

We have made some comparisons between the properties of local (z = 0) gas-rich galaxies capable of causing DLA absorption systems in the spectra of background QSOs and the properties of the low-redshift galaxies thought to be responsible for the DLA lines discovered in QSO absorption-line surveys. We have referred to these galaxies as DLA galaxies. We find that, while many of the properties of the two samples are similar, the comparisons and overall statistical results (Rao & Turnshek 2000 and 2001) suggest that there may be an excess of DLA galaxies at low redshift in the form of dwarf and/or low surface brightness galaxies which exhibit unexpectedly large neutral hydrogen column densities. Some examples of low-redshift DLA galaxies are shown by Nestor et al. in these proceedings.

It would seem that there are three possible interpretations for this finding. First, we may be missing a large fraction of dwarfs and/or low surface brightness galaxies in local galaxy surveys that could add to the z = 0 DLA statistics. At present, there seems to be a fair amount of controversy about whether this is possible (Schneider & Rosenberg 2000; Zwaan, Briggs, & Sprayberry 2001). Also, see the separate results presented by O'Neil and Rosenberg at this workshop. Second, there may be substantial evolution between the z < 1.65 QSO DLA absorption-line samples and the z = 0 21 cm emission samples, however this possibility is not easily reconciled with the notion that the DLA galaxy population represents a relatively slowly evolving population (Pettini et al. 1999; Rao & Turnshek 2000). Lastly, we are still surely at the mercy of small number statistics, and this may lead to premature speculation.

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 9970873.