=

1.25in .125in .25in

Scaling and fluctuations in galaxy distribution: two tests to probe large scale structure

In Fig.1 it is shown an homogenous distribution with poissonian fluctuations in the two-dimensional Euclidean space. In such a distribution the average density is a well defined property if it measured on scales larger than the mean particle separation Λ. Even if there are some small amplitude fluctuations up to a certain scale, or up to the sample's size, the average density is still a well defined property. For example in Fig.2 it is shown a distribution where the fluctuation structures are extended over the whole sample. In such a case the average density is still a well defined property, and it can be measured at large enough scales (r  >  λ0), when the amplitude of the fluctuations become smaller than the average density itself, i.e. when δN(r)  /  〈N(r)〉  ≤  1. These two systems belong to the class of distributions with small amplitude fluctuations. The fact that the average density is well defined implies that any one point property is well defined. For example in a ball of radius r > λ0  >  Λ centered in a randomly chosen point, in both the distributions, the number of points is constant, a part a small fluctuations whci vanishes when r is farther increased. In these case when the average density is well-defined, it is possible to study the statistical properties of the fluctuations around the it. For example, given an occupied point, the number of points at distance r is given by (Peebles, 1980)

[formula]

where

[formula]

Note that the volume integral of ξ(r), over the whole space where the average density 〈n〉 (one point property) has been estimated, must be zero by definition. In a finite volume, the integral of ξ(r) gives the excess of points with respect to a Poisson distribution.

A completely different situation happens in the system as the one shown in Fig.3. Suc a system is characterized by having voids of all sizes up to the sample size. For such a distribution, it is not possible to define the average density, or more generally, to study the one point properties. This is because the system is characterized by having structures and voids of all sizes and at all scales (up to the sample size). Hence if we make the simple exercise we did before, by putting a ball of radius r centered in a randomly chosen point, the number of points inside the ball will strongly fluctuate from a position to another. For example, if the center is in a void of size larger than the ball's diameter, we do not find any point, while if the center is in a large scale structure we find a huge number of points. This happens as long as the distribution has fractal properties, i.e. as long as the size of the voids increases in a proportionally to the size of the sample. Hence in such a situation one will never find a scale λ0 above which the fluctuations become small and it is not possible to measure the one-point average density. Fractals are then distribution with fluctuations as large as the (conditional) average density at all scales. The proper way to characterize the statistical properties is to focus on the scaling behavior of two-point quantities. For example one may study the two-point conditional average density (Pietronero 1987, Sylos Labini et al., 1998) defined as

[formula]

This function measures the average density at distance r from an occupied point. The term 〈n〉 is just a normalizing factor equal to N / V which is useful in order to compare the results from different distributions where the number of points N and the volume V can be different. The last equality in Eq.3 gives the point of this discussion: if D < 3 the conditional average density has a scaling behavior as a function of distance and hence: (i) the one-point average density is not a defined quantity and (ii) the only charactering quantity is the scaling exponent or fractal dimension D. If, otherwise, D = 3 then the system has an average density defined, and hence once can focus the attention to the statistical properties of the fluctuations about the average density itself. In the fractal case the distribution is characterized by large fluctuations.

These simple but fundamental properties of systems with large fluctuations change our perspective on the studies of the statistical properties of a given distribution. Instead of assuming that the one-point properties are defined in any given sample, as it is done in the standard analysis (Peebles 1980), we test whether the distribution has such a property (Pietronero 1987, Sylos Labini et al., 1998). The application of these methods to the redshift space distribution of galaxies has been discussed at lengthly and we refer to Sylos Labini et al. (1998) for a comprehensive review of the subject. Recently (Sylos Labini & Gabrielli, 2000) we have proposed to study two properties of galaxy counts as a function of apparent magnitude, in order to discriminate between a small scale (~  5  ÷  20h- 1Mpc) homogeneous distribution, and a fractal structure on large scales (~  100  ÷  300h- 1Mpc): (i) The slope α of the counts can be associated, in the bright end where z  ≪  1, to a possible fractal dimension in real space, by simple arguments. (ii) Fluctuations of counts about the average behavior as a function of apparent magnitude in the whole magnitude range [formula]. These fluctuations are related to the very statistical properties of the spatial distribution, independently on cosmological corrections. While in an homogeneous distribution they are exponentially damped as a function of apparent magnitude, in a fractal they are persistent at all scales. Large field-to-field fluctuations in the counts have been reported both in the bright and in the faint ends and in different photometric bands: they can be due to some systematic measurement errors or to a genuine effect of large scale structures. For this reson we need better calibrated photometric samples. Therefore, the application of these tests to the forthcoming photometric surveys is then fundamental to understand and characterize the large scale galaxy clustering.