The Properties of Spiral Galaxies in Semi-Analytic Galaxy Formation Models

Semi-analytic galaxy formation is a powerful technique with which to explore the most important physical processes in galaxy formation and evolution (such as dark matter halo formation and evolution, gas cooling, star formation, the return of chemical elements and energy back into the interstellar medium, and dust obscuration). One of the most important assumptions underlying these models is that all galaxies either have been or presently are disk-dominated. Consequently, the properties of spiral galaxies in this type of model are of special importance. Here, we compare the colors (accounting for dust) and SFRs of present-day spiral galaxies in the model of Cole et al. (2000) with observational constraints: Cole et al. (2000) have already demonstrated that the luminosities and sizes of their model disk galaxies are in good agreement with observations.

We compare the colors of the model disks with those of a sample of 121 low-inclination spiral galaxies taken from Bell & de Jong (2000). We estimate colors at one disk half-light radius: these colors should be representative of the whole disk and should be only minimally affected by dust. Observational data for the SFR comparison was taken from Kennicutt (1998).

In panel a of Fig. 1 we show the comparison of the observed and model galaxy SFRs. Model SFRs are scaled by the disk size, accounting for the differing distribution of gas, young stars and old stars in observed spiral galaxies. The model SFRs provide a surprisingly good match to the observed galaxies: the SFR in the model does not depend on the gas density (only on the global dynamical timescale, the cold gas mass and disk circular velocity). There is a slight offset between the model and observed SFRs: this may be removed when model galaxies are selected in the same way as the observational sample, or by using a slightly different spatial distribution of gas and the old and young stars.

In panel b we show the median colors of observed and model galaxies as a function of magnitude (large symbols MK  <   - 24.5; small symbols MK  >   - 21.5). Model galaxies are selected to have the same K-band surface brightnesses and absolute magnitudes as the observed galaxies, ensuring that we are comparing model disks to their observational analogues. The R  -  K colors, which are primarily a metallicity indicator, are accurately reproduced by the model galaxies. Also, the B  -  R colors of model low-luminosity spiral disks are a reasonable match to the observations. However, the B  -  R colors of the most luminous model disks are too blue, indicating that the model disks have a young luminosity-weighted age. We are working towards understanding this discrepancy: two possibile resolutions include modifying the star formation law and altering the recipe for gas cooling at late times in the largest galaxy-sized halos.