Hyperbolic sub-dynamics: compact invariant 3-manifolds

Introduction

In 1970, Hirsch asked what kind of compact invariant sets could lie in a hyperbolic set. In particular, he asked whether the restriction of a diffeomorphism to a hyperbolic set that is a manifold induced an Anosov diffeomorphism, and found conditions under which an affirmative answer is obtained [\cite=hirsch]. In 1975, Mañé found a characterization of hyperbolic dynamics when restricted to compact invariant manifolds, which he called quasi Anosov diffeomorphisms [\cite=manhe]. Finally, in 1976, Franks and Robinson gave an example of a quasi Anosov diffeomorphism in a connected sum of two [formula] that is not Anosov [\cite=frob], giving a negative answer to the question posed by Hirsch. This example consists essentially in considering a linear Anosov system on a torus, say T1, and its inverse on another torus T2. They produce appropriate perturbations on each torus (DA diffeomorphisms) around their respective fixed points. Then they cut suitable balls containing these fixed points, and carefully glue together along their boundary so that the stable and unstable foliations intersect quasi-transversally. The aforementioned characterization by Mañé yields a quasi-Anosov diffeomorphism in the connected sum of T1 and T2, what implies that T1  #  T2 is a compact invariant subset of some hyperbolic set.

An example of a quasi Anosov diffeomorphism in a non orientable 3-manifold may be found in [\cite=zhumed]. The example is similar to Franks and Robinson's, but a quotient by an involution is done to the dynamics in the Ti's before gluing them together.

Here we show that all the examples of 3D compact invariant manifolds that lie in hyperbolic sets are connected sums of these. More precisely, We could also say that hyperbolic 3-manifolds are generalized connected sums of k tori quotiented by involutions, where the generalized sum of M1 and M2 consists in taking away r cells from M1 and M2 and gluing together along the boundary of the cells by means of a reversing orientation diffeomorphism.

The dynamics on these sets is also classified: Observe that all quasi Anosov diffeomorphisms can be obtained as the restriction of a diffeomorphism to a hyperbolic set which is a sub-manifold (see theorem [\ref=teo.manhe]), so in particular we obtain a classification of quasi-Anosov dynamics in dimension 3. This completes a description started in [\cite=rhuv].

Let us remark that, from all examples above, only [formula] can be an invariant subset of any known Anosov system, due to a result by A. Zeghib . In that case, the dynamics is Anosov. See [\cite=zeghib]

Let us also mention that hyperbolic sets which are 2D manifolds are always tori, and the dynamics on them is Anosov. The question remains open for hyperbolic submanifolds of higher dimensions .

I thank the Department of Mathematics of the U. of Toronto, where part of this work has been done, and M. Shub for kind hospitality during my stay. I am also indebted to the Departamento de Matemática of Cuernavaca, specially A. Arroyo and J. Seade. I thank F. Rodriguez Hertz, R. Ures and A. Zeghib for useful comments.

Proof

A diffeomorphism g:M  →  M is called quasi Anosov if [formula] is unbounded for each non zero vector of TxM. There is a relation between quasi Anosov diffeomorphisms and hyperbolic sub-manifolds (sub-manifolds that are hyperbolic sets). Condition described in item (3) is called quasi-transversality. Observe that, as a corollary, quasi Anosov diffeomorphisms satisfy Axiom A and the no cycle condition. A hyperbolic set A is a codimension one expanding attractor if Wu(x)  ⊂  A and dim Wu(x) =  dim M - 1 for all x∈A. Codimension one shrinking repellors are defined analogously. A codimension one expanding attractor is orientable if the intersection index [formula] is constant at all intersection points with x,y∈A. Then we have the following: Finally, let us state Since a codimension one expanding attractor of an Axiom A g can be written as a finite union of connected codimension one expanding attractors of gn for some n > 0, the whole thing is reduced to proving Ω(g) consists of codimension one attractors and repellors.

All attractors of 3D quasi Anosov diffeomorphisms are codimension one expanding attractors.

Let us say that a basic set is (s,u) if its stable dimension is s and its unstable dimension is u. Being Λi and Λj basic sets, let us denote Λi  →  Λj if [formula]. Observe that this relation induces a connected graph in Ω(g) which has no cycles. Also, Λi  →  Λj implies that si  ≥  sj due to item ([\ref=item3]) in theorem [\ref=teo.manhe] above.

If A is an attractor and Λ is a (1,2) set such that Λ  →  A then Λ = A.

Remark above immediately implies that A is a codimension one expanding attractor. Moreover, definition applies so [formula] is a codimension one expanding attractor. The rest follows from Plykin's theorem above since Λ  →  A implies [formula] is connected.

So, this proves that, unless the diffeomorphism is Anosov, all maximal chains must have a change of index. Also, that all maximal chains are of the form R  →  A where R is a codimension one shrinking repellor and A is a codimension one expanding attractor. Each repellor/attractor generates a 3-torus and, in case they are related, a connected sum à la Franks-Robinson arises. Let us finally observe that these models are not stable (indeed, it is easy to obtain perturbations whose dynamic behavior is very different), but are Ω-stable.