Application of an objective method for the identification of Young Star Groupings in spiral galaxies.

Introduction

Several works have pointed out the importance of the study of YSGs in galaxies and, in particular, of the study of the relations between properties of the YSGs and global properties of the mother galaxy. These relations are important for deducing properties of the physical mechanism of star formation and, possibly, as indirect distance estimates. Examples of such correlations found in the literature are the scaling laws between the largest YSG in a galaxy and the size of the galaxy itself (Elmegreen et al. 1994, 1996), or the relationship between the total B magnitude and color indices of the galaxy and the luminosity of the greatest YSG (Wray et al. 1980). To check these laws and to deducing new interesting relations, we have developed an automatic method for the identification of the YSGs in unresolved galaxies. The method is based on a multivariate statistical analysis (Adanti et al. 1994, Battinelli et al. 2000).

Results and discussions

We have applied our technique to five almost face-on spiral galaxies, so far: NGC 7217, UGC 12732, NGC 1058, NGC 3377a and NGC 3507. Data were taken with the APO 3.5 meter telescope. Data and results for the first three galaxies are published in Battinelli et al. 2000, while data for the last two galaxies have been just recently obtained and not yet published. We find 149, 108, 69, 83 and 90 YSGs respectively. For each YSG we determine position, dimension, (as average of the x and y extents) and integrated blue magnitude. Here we report some preliminary results: for the unpublished galaxies we give the map of the distribution of the YGSs (Figure 1). Galaxy distances were estimated by mean of the Hubble law, with H0=75 Km/s/Mpc and radial velocities from RC3 (de Vaucouleurs et al. 1991), except for NGC 3377a, whose distance is obtained from Cepheids (Tonry et al. 1990). The uncertainty on the contribution of the peculiar motion to the radial velocities is the principal source of error.

Table 1 resumes some of the data displayed in Figure 2, that shows some correlations among some YSGs parameters and properties of their mother galaxies. By the way, to draw firm conclusions about these relationships require a larger data sample and more reliable distance determinations.