MASSIVE CONSTITUENT QUARKS AND UNIFIED DESCRIPTION OF FREEZE-OUT PARAMETERS: DOES QGP FORM AT LOW ENERGIES?

e-mail: < chernav@lpi.ru > ,   < feinberg@lpi.ru > ,   < royzen@lpi.ru >

Analysis of QSI/SIS, BNL/AGS and CERN/SPS data on central collisions of heavy nuclei have led CR [\cite=CR] to the conclusion that, for any per nucleon impinging energy (from the corresponding very wide interval), freeze-out points for all species of final hadrons concentrate around a single point in the phase space plane (μ,T), μ and T being baryonic chemical potential and temperature, respectively. If one takes into account the observation that final hadrons of each species show up the same mean energy about 1 GeV, then these three points fall to the theoretically motivated freeze-out curve it 1 in Fig. 1 which was treated by the authors as a boundary between the hadronic and QGP phases (the domains of the plane below and above the curve 1, respectively).

Of course, the first (hadronic) part of this statement meets no objections, whereas the second one deserves a much more careful discussion. Indeed, everything, what underlies the remarkable CR observation, is that, at each of the above energies, the nuclear matter produced in course of heavy ion collision consists of some subhadronic entities mixed in a proper proportion which coalesce to form hadrons at the Hagedorn [\cite=Hag] temperature TH. However, since this proportion is governed mostly by the differences in masses of the entities, irrespectively of whether they are current quarks or valons, it is rather insensitive to their mass values themselves. It is why the CR results do not necessarily ask for QGP formation - the same unification in the (μ,T)-plane is expected to result from coalescence of valons linked to current quarks: Qu and Qd of the mass ≃ 330 MeV and Qs of the mass ≃ 480 MeV. If the interaction energy is sufficiently high, then this pion-valonic state comes next to the QGP which is formed at the early stage of interaction, whereas, if this energy is rather low, then this state is formed from the very beginning of interaction, i.e., no QGP is formed at all. Within this pattern of nuclear matter (fireball) evolution, one can, obviously, get rid of the questionable (and annoying) assumption of mysterious low energy QGP. Instead, formation of an chemically and thermally equilibrium pion-valonic state (Q - π) is suggested which precedes the hadronization. This would not be even an assumption, if valons were incorporated consistently into the QCD formalism. However, all the endeavors to do this have been unsuccessful [\cite=W].

Still one point deserves mentioning in this connection. After hadronization, the final state attractive interaction between hadrons remains still quite strong (corresponding pn cross section may be of several hundreds mb), what is confirmed by tremendous fraction of final deuterons at low energies, d / p  ≃ 0,37 at SIS. At higher energies, when pions are produced numerously, a similar (but, most probably, somewhat lower) effect should be caused by the ρ-meson resonance. Thus, the general patterns of nuclear matter evolution should look like as it is illustrated by curves 2 and 3 in Fig. 1., QGP phase being pushed out toward the higher temperatures and chemical potentials.

Actually, the most of what was said above in order to clarify the real physical sense of CR observation is nothing else, than the "old news". Most probably, E. Shuryak was the first, who summarized a number of theoretical indications known at that time and called the attention [\cite=Sh] to possible existence of a new mass scale of the order of 300 MeV in the hadron physics. He expressed also an idea of two separate phase transitions - the valonic deconfinement and chiral symmetry restoration. Similar concept was considered in [\cite=EF2], where it was noticed that only ≃ 3 time increase of density (as compared to the nucleus one) is needed to form a configuration of nearly "close packed" (i.e., getting in touch) nucleons. As the compression goes on, the valons no longer "recognize" their own nucleon and thus are getting unbound (more strictly, their confinement radius becomes ≃  A1 / 3 times larger, A being the number of compressed nucleons). Of course, one can never meet such conditions in real nucleus collisions - even at SIS, the freeze-out temperature is expected to be about 55 MeV and therefore, the hadronization temperature TH should be still noticeably higher. Under such temperatures, nucleons should disintegrate, apparently, even at lower compression . The main question of interest is now, what has to result from their disintegration: firstly the quazi-ideal gas of valons of a size (0,2-0,4) fm [\cite=AQM] (and pions) or immediately the point-like current quarks and qluons? For some time, this problem was subjected to a quite lively discussion [\cite=*d] which then unfoundedly faded. In our opinion, the CR observation showed that withdrawal of valons was, at least, a premature doing.

In this connection, we would like to remind that presented above qualitative picture (see Fig. 1) of phases passed by hot and dense nuclear matter in course of its evolution is emerged, in particular, from a certain QCD bag model incorporating valons inevitably which was worked out [\cite=ChF] in more detail. Also a quite good explanation of the observed low (and, maybe, middle) mass dilepton yield was obtained [\cite=ChFR] from consideration of the pion-valonic phase the expanding nuclear matter is assumed to pass through.

This work is supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Researches, grants No.'s 96-15-96798 and 00-02-17250.

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1. Chiral transition (solid curve 3) and hadronization (dashed curve 2) with an intermediate phase in between, preceeding the Cleymans-Redlich (CR) freeze-out unified pattern (dashed and solid curves 1).