=1

Lemma Corollary

Minimum multicuts and Steiner forests for Okamura-Seymour graphs

Introduction

Computing the minimum multicut of a graph is an important problem in combinatorial optimization. The problem is formally defined below. Minimum Multicut: Given an undirected graph G  =  (V,E) on n vertices and m edges with edge costs ce and a set [formula] of k terminal pairs. Our goal is to find a set of edges F of minimum cost separating all the terminal pairs (si,ti),1  ≤  i  ≤  k, i.e., in the subgraph [formula], there is no path between si and ti, for 1  ≤  i  ≤  k. The minimum multicut problem is NP-hard and APX-hard, even for trees, which excludes the possibility of a PTAS. Garg, Vazirani and Yannakakis gave a 2-approximation algorithm for trees [\citep=GargVY97] and an O( log k)-approximation algorithm for general undirected graphs [\citep=GargVY96]. When G is planar and all the terminals are on the boundary of the outer face of G, we denote such an instance of the minimum multicut problem an Okamura-Seymour instance. The problem of finding edge-disjoint paths on such type of graphs were studied by Okamura and Seymour [\citep=OS81]. They showed the following important theorem (dF(S) denotes the number of edges in F exactly one of whose endpoints is in S).

Let G = (V,E) be an undirected planar graph and let R = {(si,ti):si,ti∈V,1  ≤  i  ≤  k} be a set of terminal pairs. Suppose the following conditions are satisfied.

All terminals are on the boundary of the outer face of G.

The Euler condition is satisfied: [formula] is Eulerian.

The cut condition is satisfied: dE(S)  ≥  dR(S), for all S  ⊆  V.

Then there exist edge-disjoint paths between si and ti, for 1  ≤  i  ≤  k.

They also showed the following corollary about the associated multicommodity flow problem.

Let G = (V,E) be an undirected planar graph and let R = {(si,ti):si,ti∈V,1  ≤  i  ≤  k} be a set of terminal pairs. Suppose the following conditions are satisfied.

All terminals are on the boundary of the outer face of G.

The cut condition is satisfied: dE(S)  ≥  dR(S), for all S  ⊆  V.

Then there exists a feasible multicommodity flow between si and ti, for 1  ≤  i  ≤  k. Moreover, if [formula] and [formula], then there exists a half-integer multicommodity flow.

Schwarzler proved that computing edge-disjoint paths in such graphs without the Euler condition is NP-hard [\citep=Schwarzler09]. Wagner and Weihe gave a linear-time algorithm to compute edge-disjoint paths in such graphs [\citep=WagnerW95]. The multicommodity flow problem for an Okamura-Seymour instance was studied by Matsumoto et al [\citep=MatsumotoNS85]. Their algorithm decides whether G has a feasible multicommodity flow, each from a source to a sink and of a given demand, and actually finds them if G has one. If G has n vertices and k source-sink pairs, their algorithm takes [formula] time and O(kn) space. However, the dual problem of computing the minimum multicut has not been addressed by them. We take a step in that direction. Our main result is the following.

The minimum multicut problem on an Okamura-Seymour instance can be reduced to the minimum-cost Steiner forest problem on an appropriately defined dual graph. The minimum-cost Steiner forest problem has a 2-approximation algorithm. Hence, the minimum multicut problem has a 2-approximation algorithm for an Okamura-Seymour instance.

The minimum-cost Steiner forest problem is formally defined below. Minimum-cost Steiner forest: Given an undirected graph G  =  (V,E) on n vertices and m edges with edge costs ce and a set [formula] of k terminal pairs. Our goal is to find a set of edges F of minimum cost connecting all the terminal pairs (si,ti),1  ≤  i  ≤  k, i.e., in the subgraph H  =  (V,F), there is some path between si and ti for 1  ≤  i  ≤  k. There is a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm for the minimum-cost Steiner forest problem in any undirected graph, due to Goemans and Williamson [\citep=GoemansW95]. A comprehensive survey of all these results is given in [\citep=Frank90]. For a more recent survey, see [\citep=NavesS09].

Reduction of minimum multicut to Steiner forest

Let OF be the outer face of G and B be the boundary of OF. We construct the dual graph Gd  =  (Vd,Ed) of the planar graph G as follows.

For each finite face f of G, we associate a dual vertex vf of Gd.

For each edge e  =  (u,v)∈E on the boundary of two finite faces f and g of G, we associate a dual edge ed  =  (vf,vg)∈Ed.

For each terminal pair (si,ti), we add two dual vertices ui,vi∈Vd such that ui,vi are on OF in the planar embedding of G. The terminal pair (si,ti) divides B into two parts. Let us denote by

[formula]

the other portion. We associate ui with

[formula]

.

For each edge e∈E on B, we add a dual vertex ve on OF and a dual edge ed  =  (ve,vf)∈Ed, where e is the common boundary of OF and a finite face f.

For each edge e∈E on B that we come across during the traversal of

[formula]

.

We assign a cost ce to dual edges of type (2) and (4). For dual edges of type (5), we assign a cost [formula], i.e., the sum of all edge costs in G. Note that there is a technical difference between the dual graph defined here and the traditional definition. Here we have many dual vertices on the infinite face, whereas traditionally there is only one dual vertex on the infinite face. This is illustrated in Figure [\ref=fig1]. In general, the dual graph Gd is not planar. We say that a set of edges F  ⊆  E corresponds to a set of edges Fd  ⊆  Ed, if for every edge f∈F, there exists one and only one edge fd∈Fd such that fd is the dual edge of f.

Let [formula] be the set of dual vertices on OF containing all the (ui,vi) pairs and let S  =  Vd  -  R be the set of remaining vertices of Gd. We call R the set of required vertices and S the set of Steiner vertices. Our goal is to connect all the pairs (ui,vi)∈R. Let SF be a Steiner forest of the dual graph Gd connecting all (ui,vi) pairs in R using some Steiner vertices in S. We call a dual edge an internal edge, if both its endpoints are inside the outer boundary B, an external edge, if both its endpoints are outside B, and a crossing edge, if one endpoint is inside and the other is outside B. Note that the external edges have a cost of N and the other edges have a cost of the corresponding primal edge. For convenience, we prove the following technical result.

Suppose Pi is a path in G between the terminals si and ti. Further, Qi is a dual path in Gd between the dual vertices ui and vi such that only its first and last edges are external edges. Then, Pi and Qi must cross each other. Hence, if [formula] contains no si-ti-path, then the dual edge set of F plus two external edges contains a ui-vi-path.

The dual path Qi starts and ends at the outer face OF and passes through the interior of B. Hence, it separates si and ti, i.e. si and ti lie on different sides of Qi. So, any path Pi between the terminals si and ti must intersect the dual path Qi.

We claim that the minimum-cost Steiner forest can't use too many external edges of cost N.

Let MSF be a minimum-cost Steiner forest in Gd connecting the pairs (ui,vi)∈R. Then, MSF can use at most 2k external edges, one for each required vertex w∈R.

Suppose this is not the case. If we use more than 2 external edges to connect a pair (ui,vi)∈R, we need at least 4 such edges. This follows from a simple pairing argument: if we go outside, we have to come back inside using an external edge and if we use only external edges, we need at least 4 such edges to connect ui and vi. But we need at least 2 external edges to connect any pair, because all the edges incident on any ui,vi are external edges. Hence, cost of MSF is at least (2k + 2)N, whereas a Steiner forest using 2k external edges will have cost at most [formula], which is strictly less than the cost of the MSF, contradicting the fact that MSF is a minimum Steiner forest.

Next we show the relationship between Steiner forests and multicuts.

Every Steiner forest SF in Gd corresponds to a multicut MC in G.

Consider the dual path Qi in SF between the dual vertices ui and vi. By Lemma 2, any path Pi in G between the terminals si and ti must intersect Qi. Therefore, primal edges corresponding to Qi is a si - ti cut. Since this is true for all terminal pairs, the primal edges corresponding to SF is a multicut MC in G.

We observe that not every multicut MC in G is a Steiner forest SF in Gd. We say that MC is a minimal multicut if for any edge e∈MC,MC  -  {e} is not a multicut, i.e. there exists terminals si and ti such that there is a path Pi between si and ti in [formula]. We show the relationship between minimal multicuts and Steiner forests in the next lemma.

Every minimal multicut MC in G corresponds to a Steiner forest SF in Gd.

Since MC is a multicut in G, there is no path between si and ti in G  -  MC. By Lemma 2, there must be a dual path between ui and vi. Hence all pairs (ui,vi)∈R are connected. Moreover, since MC is minimal, there is only one path between ui and vi. Thus, the dual edges corresponding to MC is a Steiner forest SF in Gd.

Combining Lemmas 3, 4 and 5, we arrive at Theorem 3.

Conclusion and open problems

In this paper, we studied the minimum multicut problem for an undirected planar graph, where all the terminal vertices are on the boundary of the outer face. We showed its relation to the minimum-cost Steiner forest problem in the dual graph and gave a 2-approximation algorithm. Are there similar relationships between these problems in a general undirected graph? Is there a direct 2-approximation algorithm for the minimum multicut problem without reducing it to the Steiner forest problem?