Dust in AGB stars: transparent or opaque?

The parameterized dust opacity

In the current study, the dust opacity which determines the radiation pressure is approximated by a wavelength dependent maximum opacity, κmax(λ), multiplied by a degree of condensation fc that changes with distance from the star and time, i.e.,

[formula]

The degree of condensation is determined by the grain temperature Td (given by radiative equilibrium in the time-dependent outflow), the assumed condensation temperature Tc of the grain material and a variable δT which adjusts how fast the condensation degree rises [\citep=1988ApJ...329..299B]. A higher condensation temperature moves the dust-forming zone closer to the surface of the star and a larger value of δT makes the dust forming zone wider. The dust opacity can be set to mimic different typical optical behaviors by giving κmax different wavelength dependencies, e.g., constant in the grey case or as a power law, [formula].

Since the opacity relevant for radiation pressure is a combination of absorption and scattering terms, the fraction of the total opacity which is treated as true absorption in the radiative transfer is also varied. If this fraction is set to zero the radiation pressure will still add momentum but there will be no direct influence on the energy distribution, simulating transparent dust grains. The scattering cross-section of the dust particles (which is negligible for small grains) will be significant for grain sizes comparable to the wavelength corresponding to the peak intensity of the stellar radiation.

Models and first results

The results presented here were obtained using a state of the art dynamical code [\citep=2008A&A...491L...1H] together with the parameterized dust opacity described above and the gas opacity generating code COMA [\citep=2009A&A...503..913A]. We want to point out that this approach gives a fully consistent dynamical structure of the atmosphere and wind-forming region, including the dust-free molecular layers in the extended outer atmosphere. The purpose of using a parameterized dust description is to narrow down the range of possible dust species responsible for driving the outflow by studying the resulting SEDs and colors. A first comparison with observations shows that models with a noticable fraction of dust absorption have extremely high (V-K) colours, independent of Tc, whereas a model with scattering only (no absorption by dust grains) lies well within the range of observed colours for Tc = 1500K. In addition to the models with a parameterized dust opacity, we also show the colours of a consistent dynamical model with a wind driven by large Fe-free silicate grains [\citep=2008A&A...491L...1H] which fits rather well with observations.