=0.pt

3-D Radiative Transfer Modeling of Structured Winds in Massive Hot Stars with Wind3D

We develop 3-D models of the structured winds of massive hot stars with the Wind3D radiative transfer (RT) code. We investigate the physical properties of large-scale structures observed in the wind of the B-type supergiant HD 64760 with detailed line profile fits to Discrete Absorption Components (DACs) and rotational modulations observed with IUE in Si  iv λ1395.

We develop parameterized input models for Wind3D with large-scale equatorial wind density- and velocity-structures, or so-called 'Co-rotating Interaction Regions' (CIRs) and 'Rotational Modulation Regions' (RMRs). The parameterized models offer important advantages for high-performance RT calculations over ab-initio hydrodynamic input models. The acceleration of the input model calculations permits us to simulate and investigate a wide variety of physical conditions in the extended winds of massive hot stars.

The new modeling method is very flexible for constraining the dynamic and geometric wind properties of RMRs in HD 64760. We compute that the modulations are produced by a regular pattern of radial density enhancements that protrude almost linearly into the equatorial wind. We find that the modulations are caused by narrow 'spoke-like' wind regions. We present a hydrodynamic model showing that the linearly shaped radial wind pattern can be caused by mechanical wave action at the base of the stellar wind from the blue supergiant.

Introduction

Accurate mass-loss rates of massive hot stars determined from quantitative spectroscopy are important for understanding the physical properties of the radiative wind driving mechanism that is influenced by dynamic structures on both large and small length scales in the wind. Rotational modulations and Discrete Absorption Components are important tracers of large-scale structures in the highly supersonic winds of these stars. DACs are recurring absorption features observed in UV resonance lines of many OB-stars. They drift bluewards in the absorption portion of P-Cygni profiles. DACs are caused by spiral-shaped density- and velocity structures winding up in the plane of the equator over several tens of stellar radii (e.g., Cranmer & Owocki 1996). Lobel & Blomme (2008) demonstrated with 3-D RT modeling (combined with hydrodynamic simulations) of the detailed DAC evolution in HD 64760 (B0.5 Ib) that these wind spirals are extended density waves emerging from two bright equatorial spots that rotate five times slower than the stellar surface. Detailed hydrodynamic models of its structured wind with these large density waves (or CIRs) reveal only a very small increase of less than 1 % above the smooth (symmetric) wind mass-loss rate.

The bright surface spots produce the large-scale CIRs in the wind. The density enhancements and velocity plateaus of the CIRs yield migrating DACs with a recurrence period of 10.3 d in the UV line profiles of HD 64760. The modulations, on the other hand, show much shorter periods of ~  1.2 d and reveal a time-evolution that substantially differs from the rather slowly shifting DACs. The modulations are nearly-flat absorption features observed for only ~  0.5 d to 0.75 d with radial velocities that can range from ~  0 km  s- 1 to ~  v∞=1560 km  s- 1 (Massa et al. 1995; Prinja 1998). They can intersect the slowly drifting DACs and sometimes reveal a remarkable bow shape (Fullerton et al. 2006) with broad flux minima around ~  930 km  s- 1. In this paper we present a semi-empiric model of the large-scale wind structures based on detailed RT fits to the time-evolution of the modulations observed in HD 64760. We utilize the wind3d code for performing non-LTE RT calculations ( Sect. 2) of important diagnostic spectral lines, such as Si  iv λ1395. We develop parameterized 3-D input models for Wind3D in Sect. 3 because they offer important advantages for high-performance RT calculations over ab-initio hydrodynamic input models. The acceleration of the input model calculations permits us to model and investigate a much broader range of 3-D physical conditions in the wind.

Parametrization of Wind3D Input Models

Wind3D computes the 3-D non-LTE transport of radiation for the 2-level atom in optically thick resonance lines formed in scattering-dominated extended stellar winds. It lambda-iterates the line source function on a Cartesian grid of 713 points. The radiative transfer equation is solved in parallel over a mesh of 7013 voxels using the converged line source function. Typical computation times with wind3d are ~  5 h for iterating the line source function, and ~  12 h for calculating the dynamic line profile variability at 90 viewing angles using 16 CPUs.

We develop a new software module in wind3d for semi-empiric modeling of large-scale equatorial wind density- and velocity-structures. The computer code integrates the time-independent momentum balance equation of radiation-driven rotating winds following Castor, Abbott & Klein (CAK, 1975). First, we parametrize the large-scale density structures in a stationary model of the equatorial wind with:

[formula]

where r2=x2+y2, Rcr ≤  r  ≤   Rmod, -  π ≤  ψ ≤   π, and Rmod is the outer radius of the wind model. x0=[formula], where ψ0 is the incidence angle of the equatorial wind structures on the stellar surface, and 0 ≤   ψ0 ≤   π/2. ρ0(r) is the density of the smooth (unperturbed) equatorial wind. n denotes the number of large-scale wind structures with enhanced density in one hemisphere, and m is an even exponent of the sine function that sets the opening angle or the tangential width of the wind structures. In wind regions where the sine function vanishes the local wind density equals the smooth wind density. The term in Eq. (1) with fc, where 0  ≤   fc ≤   1, determines the curvature of the wind structures between [formula] and Rmod. If fc=1, they turn completely around the star over 2 π from the surface radius [formula] to Rmod. In case fc=0, the structures do not curve at all and stay strictly radial (linear) in the wind, ordered in equal sectors around the star. We parametrize the density constrast of the large-scale wind structures with the function A in Eq. (1):

[formula]

where c1,2,3,4 are constants. They determine the detailed density profile compared to ρ0(r). We vary the four constants until the parameterized density profile best fits the density contrast of the CIRs in the hydrodynamic wind model of HD 64760.

Next, with the parameterized radial wind density-structure we compute the corresponding radial wind velocity-structure for the α parameter of CAK theory set equal to 1/2 in hot stars with 20 kK ≤   Teff ≤   30 kK. We solve the CAK momentum balance equation in 1-D for many angles ψ, and include the centrifugal force in the equatorial plane due to the photospheric rotation velocity vrot. With the conservation of angular momentum the equatorial tangential wind velocity is [formula], which becomes negligibly small in the highly supersonic outer regions of the parameterized wind models. We integrate the momentum equation together with the mass continuity equation towards the surface from a typical outer (reference) radius rref  ≥  30 [formula] with the boundary condition v(r = rref) = v∞, down to the critical point Rcr of the wind. The value of the mass-loss rate for calculating the CAK line force is computed with Eq. (5) of Lobel & Blomme (2008), but which typically increases the structured wind mass-loss rate by less than ~  1 % in the best-fit 2-spot model. We find that the radial wind velocity-structure computed with the CAK wind-momentum equation integration method, using parameterized stationary wind density models, compares very closely to the hydrodynamic wind velocity model of HD 64760 (Lobel & Toalá 2009).

Radiative Transfer Modeling of Rotational Modulations

Figure 1 compares the dynamic spectrum of Si  iv observed over 15.5 d in HD 64760 ( right-hand panel) and computed with wind3d ( left-hand panel) using a parameterized structured wind model. The slowly bluewards migrating upper and lower DACs result from two spiral-shaped CIRs shown in the right-hand panels of Fig. 2. The nearly horizontal absorption in the modulations is due to almost linearly shaped density enhancements and local wind velocity variations that radially protrude into the equatorial wind. The RMRs have maximum tangential widths of less than ~  1 [formula] across the wind. Our parameterized RT modeling reveals that the RMRs are linear density enhancements through the wind because the modulations of HD 64760 stay flat beyond 1000 km  s- 1. The upper panels of Fig. 2 show that the (radial velocity) acceleration of the modulations is too slow ( left-hand panel) in case the RMRs curve too quickly over ~  10 [formula] above the stellar surface ( right-hand panel). Hence, the RMRs are large-scale density- and velocity-structures in the supersonically (radiatively) accelerating equatorial wind. The parameterized best-fit modeling method shows that the RMRs are centered around the star with small inclination angles of [formula] from the radial direction (the rather narrow RMRs have small incidence angles on the stellar surface in the middle panel of Fig. 2). We also compute opening angles of [formula] for the RMRs at the wind base to correctly fit the observed duration of the modulations.

Figure 3 shows a portion of the dynamic spectrum in Fig. 1 observed between 0 d and 3.1 d (upper right-hand panel). The lower DAC in Fig. 3 slowly shifts bluewards from ~  1100 km  s- 1 to ~  1400 km  s- 1, while two modulations are observed around 1.2 d ( lower modulation) and 2.5 d ( upper modulation). The upper modulation is observed during ~  0.7 d and reveals a somewhat curved shape, whereas the lower one occurs during ~  0.5 d showing a more irregular absorption pattern below ~  800 km  s- 1. We delineate the borders of the wind density enhancements in two RMRs above the stellar surface and compute the radial wind velocity structure of the parameterized model by integrating the CAK momentum equation ( Sect. 2). The lower panels of Fig. 3 show the observed ( right-hand panel) and best-fit ( left-hand panel) dynamic flux profile of the upper modulation computed with wind3d. We fit the peculiar wedge-like shape at its short-wavelength side in detail by decreasing the opening angle of the density enhancement borders of the RMR beyond 1 [formula] above the stellar surface, shown in Fig. 4. The radial wind velocity-structure of the upper modulation does not exceed ~  1200 km  s- 1 around 2.8 d, and it does not intersect the velocity of the lower DAC around ~  1400 km  s- 1. The wind density and velocity model of the upper modulation in Fig. 4 does therefore not exceed a distance of ~  2.5 [formula] above the stellar surface because the smooth-wind velocity exceeds ~  1200 km  s- 1 only beyond that radius. We therefore attribute the remarkable bow shape (called 'phase-bowing') observed in the upper modulation to the intrinsically curved shape of the front and backside borders of the RMR we model in detail in Fig. 4. Several modulations observed between 5.5 d and 9 d in Fig. 1 do not show a clear bow shape (they are in fact strictly flat), although their flux profiles compare closely to the modulations that show the bow shape in Fig. 3. The remarkable bow shape is rather peculiar and results from the slightly curved shapes of a number of RMRs in the model. Modulations without the bow shape are due to RMRs that protrude strictly radially into the wind. Best fits to the detailed flux profiles in the modulations show that the maximum density of the RMRs does not exceed the smooth-wind density by ~  17 %, or about half the maximum density contrast of ~  31 % in the CIR model of the lower DAC. Hence, the RMRs do not appreciably increase the wind mass-loss rate of HD 64760, also concluded for the CIR models in Lobel & Blomme (2008).

Owocki, Cranmer, & Fullerton (1995) presented a kinematic model for the spiral density wind features that satisfies the time-dependent mass-continuity relation. We further investigate the results of the (time-independent) semi-empiric modeling method with time-dependent hydrodynamic models. We compute hydroynamic test models of RMRs in HD 64760 with zeud3d. We introduce a propagating pressure wave at the lower wind boundary near the stellar surface. The wave propagates horizontally over the stellar equator. It periodically alters the radiative wind acceleration due to mechanical momentum imparted upwards to the wind by wave action. Figure 5 shows the density contrast computed in the wind out to 30 [formula] for a wave with a radial velocity amplitude of vsound/100 at the stellar surface. The wavelength is set to 1/16 of the stellar circumference and it co-rotates couter-clockwise with the surface (ωwave=ωstar). The density structure at the wind base is very intricate and converges into 16 rather narrow and stable density enhancements extending almost radially through the wind. The tangential width of the wind density enhancements ( in yellow color) is ≤  1 [formula], comparable to the parameterized model we find for the RMRs. The hydrodynamic model in Fig. 6 shows a decrease of the intrinsic curvature of these narrow wind features for a wave that rotates 5 times slower than the surface (ωwave=ωstar / 5). The velocity amplitude of the wave is increased to 2  ×  vsound, producing somewhat larger densities of ~  8 % above the smooth-wind density. The near-linear regular pattern in the hydrodynamic wind model is almost identical to the spoke-like RMRs we compute with parameterized models of the modulations in HD 64760. The maximum density contrast of the hydrodynamic wind pattern is however too small compared to ~  17 % of the RMRs to fit the flux profiles observed in the modulations. Further hydrodynamic modeling is required to simulate the conditions of the best-fit parameterized wind model in more detail, and to investigate the formation physics of the large-scale wind pattern that causes the modulations observed in HD 64760.

Conclusions

We perform 3-D RT calculations with wind3d of the rotational modulations observed in Si  iv λ1395 of HD 64760. We find that the horizontal absorptions in the line are caused by a very regular pattern of almost linearly shaped radial density- and velocity-variations in the equatorial wind out to ~  10 [formula] above the stellar surface. The density in the RMRs does not exceed ~  17 % of the smooth-wind density, and hence they do not appreciably increase the stellar mass-loss rate. Hydrodynamic models computed with zeus3d show that RMRs can result from mechanical wave action at the base of the stellar wind producing the rather narrow 'spoke-like' wind regions in a regular geometric pattern centered around the star. We conjecture that the waves are caused by non-radial pulsations (for example discussed in Kaufer et al. 2006) of HD 64760.

References