Analysis of Computer Science Communities Based on DBLP

Introduction

Computer science is a broad and constantly growing field. It comprises various subareas each of which has its own specialization and characteristic features. At the same time there exist multiple connections between the areas. Thus for example Information Retrieval combines computer science, linguistics, cognitive psychology, and mathematics. Yet another example, from the area of the World Wide Web: its rapid growth requires efficient techniques for management of the large volumes of data - a task that has traditionally been associated with the field of Databases. The interdisciplinary nature of research is reflected by the conferences' content. Take for instance the Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM): besides the topic spelled out in the conference title, it has two other, equally important, streams: information retrieval and databases. While different in size and granularity, research areas and conferences can be thought of as scientific communities that bring together specialists sharing similar interests. What is specific about conferences is that in addition to scope, participating scientists and regularity, they are also characterized by level. In each area there is a certain number of commonly agreed upon top ranked venues, and many others - with the lower rank or unranked. In this work we aim at finding out how the communities represented by different research fields and conferences are evolving and communicating to each other. To answer this question we survey the development of the author career, compare various research areas to each other, and finally, try to identify features that would allow to distinguish between venues of different rank. We believe that such an insight might be of interest for advanced students who are about to choose their specialization; young researchers looking for an appropriate conference to submit their work; authorities who decide on funding of diverse research areas.

This paper is organized as follows: in Section [\ref=sec:related_work] we give an overview of the related work. Section [\ref=sec:data] elaborates on the data collection. In Section [\ref=sec:authors] we discuss the author profiling. Section [\ref=sec:area_compar] focuses on the comparison between various communities and venues. Section [\ref=sec:summary] concludes the paper.

Related Work

Analysis of large social networks became one of the active research directions in the late 90-th. Watts and Strogatz [\cite=Watts:Strogatz] contributed to the networks analysis by elaborated discussions on topology, clustering patterns and comparison of random and regular networks. Newman [\cite=Newman:1] [\cite=Newman:2] [\cite=Newman:3] has been studying a wide variety of social networks and investigating their essential properties, such as degree distribution, centrality, betweenness, and assortativity, to name a few. The theoretical insight into the principles of social networks yielded a great deal of interest in studying research communities and their properties based on the coauthorship networks. Nascimento [\cite=Nascimento:2003] has studied network properties of the SIGMOD co-authorship graph. Hiemstra et.al [\cite=Hiemstr:etal] suggested a topological analysis of the Information Retrieval community extracted from the SIGIR records. Backstrom, Huttenlocher and Kleinberg [\cite=Kleinberg:etal] have studied mechanisms underlying the membership, growth, and change of the user-defined communities in LiveJournal and DBLP. An extensive bibliometric study has been performed by Elmacioglu and Dongwoon Lee [\cite=Elmacioglu:Lee]. Using DBLP to build a co-authorship network they have investigated various properties of the Data Base community and came to the conclusion that DB is a "small-world" community. Using CiteSeer as a source of bibliograhic records, Huang et. al. [\cite=Huang:etal] applied bibilometric techniques to the analysis of a number of computer science fields in order to study dynamic properties of the underlying netwoks. Based on the top ranked venues recorded in DBLP, Bird et. al [\cite=Bird:etal] identified 14 computer science communities and studied collaboration patterns and interdisciplinary research at the individual, within-area, and network levels.

Besides the network property analysis there is an interest in research related to the topic development and distribution in scientific community. Zäine, Chen and Goebel [\cite=Zain:etal] used collaboration network embedded in DBLP to discover topical connections between the network members and eventually use them in a recommendation system. Another investigation connecting topics and co-authors community has been reported in [\cite=Zhou:etal]. The work used CiteSeer as a testbed and aimed at getting insight in topic evolution and connection between the researchers and topics.

Yet another branch of investigation aims at evaluation of scientific venues. The first attempts relied heavily on the citation networks [\cite=Giles:Council] [\cite=Sun:Giles:Sidiropoulos]. However as citations are not always available in bibliographic databases other approaches have been proposed. In [\cite=Zhuang:Elmacioglu] criteria for evaluation of program committee members has been developed and successfully applied for ranking conferences recorded in CiteSeer. Yan and Lee [\cite=Yan:Lee] suggested recently a way of ranking venues based on the scientific contribution of individual scholars. The method has been evaluated on ACM and DBLP data sets.

Our work bears on the previous research in that it focuses on statistical investigation of the scientific communities. Its contribution consists in:

extension of a framework for author analysis in order to build a comprehensive profile of the researchers on DBLP;

setting up and analysis of criteria that allows for both between-area comparison and comparison of conferences that belong to different levels, in an attempt to build up a framework for automatic evaluation of scientific venues.

Data Collection

We use computer science bibliographic database DBLP to conduct our investigation. The database is publicly available in XML format at  . We downloaded the file in August 2009 and used conference publications for corpus construction. While DBLP covers 50 years of publications the data before 1970 is rather irregular. This is the reason why we consider publications from 1970 on.

The complete list accounts for 4449 distinct conference names. Manual examination of the conference pages in DBLP has shown that some venues have changed their names one or more times since they had been established. This observation suggests that we cannot treat conference names as unique because there is no guarantee of capturing the entire history of a venue. Fortunately all instances of the the same conference can be automatically identified with the XML tags in the original file. We use this feature and integrate all events of a venue with multiple names under the name of a component with the longest history. Table [\ref=tab:conf_integr] illustrates the idea. Due to the name unification, the number of conferences is brought down to 2626. Publications from these conferences constitute the most general data set we use for our experiments. It is denoted CS dataset and represents the entire DBLP in the context of this paper.

As we are interested in a comparative analysis of different scientific communities and venues we have to split the entire set of publications into topical subareas. One of the ways to do so is to specify sets of conferences that correspond to every subarea we want to analyze. Thus we select 14 subareas  each of which is represented by a set of relevant top ranked conferences with at least 10 years time span for the sake of data stability . The idea of relying on the top ranked conferences is inspired by works of [\cite=Bird:etal] [\cite=Huang:etal] [\cite=Zhuang:Elmacioglu] [\cite=Yan:Lee], and is grounded on the assumption that high quality conferences are clearly defined in terms of topics they cover. While every area has a modest number of commonly agreed upon top ranked venues, the assignment remains subjective. This is the reason why we validate the choice of venues by consulting several hand-made conference ranking sources [\cite=cr:cscr] [\cite=tier:cscr] [\cite=nanyang:cscr] and considered the estimated venue impact provided by [\cite=cr:impact] . To enable a fair comparison we represent each subarea by the same or nearly the same number of conferences . Table [\ref=tab:subjects] shows the resulting data set which is denoted TOP dataset.

As one of our goals is to identify a set of features that would help to distinguish between top and non-top conferences, we need a selection of conferences that do not belong to the set of top ranked venues. Using the same human-made sources we select 6 areas with 5 representative conferences each. They are given in table [\ref=tab:rank_3], and constitute the NONTOP dataset.

Note that there are some differences between the two sets in terms of topical partitioning and number of covered subareas. This is explained by the fact that the data about the lower ranked conferences is less consistent and agreeable, and we have preferred to construct smaller though more reliable sets.

In these three sets above we exclude all publications that have incomplete bibliographic data such as missing authors, title or year. These constitute 0.052% of the records. The remaining publications are used to build co-authorship graphs GCS, GTop, and GnonTop, where GTop,GnonTop∈GCS. These are undirected graphs where the authors constitute the set of vertices {V}, and two vertices vi,vk∈{V} are connected by an edge e'∈{E} iff vi and vk have coauthored at least one paper. Our experiments are based on these graphs along with other bibliographic data such as number of records, venue, year.

General Researcher Profiling

The authors in co-author network are typically investigated from the point of view of their contribution to the research. Thus particular attention is paid to the members of program committees [\cite=Zhuang:Elmacioglu], "fathers" of the influential research directions [\cite=Zhou:etal], authors with high citation index [\cite=find1] or yet those researchers who get often acknowledged [\cite=Giles:Council]. Such an approach yields an interesting but narrow image of the researchers community. In this section we aim at providing a broader view on the authors in entire DBLP and the areas described above by looking at their typical career length, interdisciplinary interests, individual performance pattern and publication distribution with respect to the top and non-top venues. Since our NONTOP dataset covers only a small part of the lower ranked venues listed in DBLP, we do not compare the TOP and NONTOP datasets to each other in this setting. Rather we contrast the data in TOP dataset to the global author statistics in DBLP.

Author career length

DBLP contains to hundreds of thousands distinct authors. But how many of them pursue a long scientific career?

Figures [\ref=fig:career_5] and  [\ref=fig:career_rest] give a full account on the authors career length distribution among the various research areas in the TOP set, CS dataset, and DBLP as a whole. The first chart represents percentage of authors with ≤  5 career length, while the second one covers periods from 6 to 20 years. It turns out that top-ranked venues are dominated by authors with ≤  5 years experience, and only [formula] stay publishing at top ranked conferences for more than 10 years. This is consistent with the figures obtained on the whole DBLP set: [formula] of authors have a longer than 10 years career. We hypothesize that the main component of DBLP authors is represented by PhD students who, after having finished their studies, leave the active scientific career. With respect to the research subareas, AT and CRYPTO have the lowest percentage of researchers with a short career and the highest percentage of people whose career length ranges between 10 and 15 years. The explanation lays probably in that fact that these domains require substantial mathematical background and thus time to obtain it which makes them harder to get in for the short time scientists, and more difficult for switching for those who spent so much time on it.

Some characteristics of "experienced" scientists

We now turn our attention to the authors with ≥  10 years experience since they are more probable to influence scientific community than "short time" researchers. There are 16192 (≈  3%) such authors in the whole DBLP set, and 2623 researchers have [formula] years publication record in the TOP set. We characterize this latter group in terms of interdisciplinarity of interests and productivity distribution.

Interdisciplinarity of Interests

Researchers do not necessarily stay in one and the same field throughout the whole career. But how many areas and at what time of their career do they typically join? What is the probability for a researcher to join one more area given that he is already publishing in some field.

There are 2623 authors in the TOP dataset whose career is ≥  10 years. Out of them only ≈  29% work in one area only. The remaining 71% join multiple areas with the average value of ≈  2.2. We have analyzed the data distribution and found that they typically publish in more than one area from the very beginning of the career with a small spike between the 5th and tenth years. It is logical to assume that the interdisciplinarity of the researcher interests serves as an indicator of the area relatedness which can be calculated. For this purpose, let Astart be an area in which the author ai started to publish . Next, build a transition matrix PAi with probabilities Ptransition  =  PAj|Pstart such that 1  ≤  j  ≤  14, and j  ≠  start. Note that there exist two basic scenarios: ai publishes in more than one area in one year, and ai publishes in one area in a given year while overall he is active in multiple areas. We treat these two cases equally when computing P.

The diagram in Figure [\ref=fig:area_relatedness] shows the most probable transitions between the areas. Each circle represents an area, and its size is defined by the number of people working in it. The thickest arrows connect the most related areas, the thinner but solid arrows correspond to the second choice and the dotted ones (when present) to the third. The diagram shows clearly that the area relatedness is asymmetric. For example, Data Mining and Machine Learning (DMML) is primarily related to the Data Bases (DB). At the same time information retrieval (NLIR), computational biology (CBIO), graphics (GV), and WWW have their closest relationship to the DMML, indicating that the authors from these domains publish actively at DMML conferences. It is natural since these more practical areas constitute a field of application for the data mining and machine learning algorithms.

It is also interesting to note that our rather global results that capture the state of interdisciplinarity in computer science in the last 40 years, are comparable to the yearly snapshots of the area overlap, found in [\cite=Bird:etal]. For example, both claim that there is a considerable authors' overlap between CRYPTO, Security (SEC), and theory (AT); Programming Languages (PL), Software Engineering (SE), and Distributed Computing (DP); Networks (NET) and DP. The similarity of findings that result from static and dynamic computations might point to the long-term relatedness between the areas.

Individual Performance Pattern

Let us now focus on the author publication distribution over time and venues. For the temporal distribution analysis we distinguish between the following three groups of authors:

Authors with ≥  10 years experience of publishing in TOPset conferences and focusing on one area only;

Authors with ≥  10 years experience of publishing in TOPset conferences and focusing on multiple areas;

Authors ∈ the TOPset with ≥  10 years experience of publishing in the CS dataset, irrespective of the number of areas and conference rank.

The average number of publications produced by each category of authors per 5-years periods are plotted at Figure [\ref=fig:performance]. The data reveals an interesting pattern: researchers in all three categories are much more active in the 2nd period of their career, and the single-area authors are even more active in the 3rd period. After that the productivity drops in the fourth period and remains stable with some minor fluctuations. Based on it we can try to reconstitute the principle milestones in the scientists' life: the first 5 years correspond roughly to the PhD. studies during which one typically produces a certain (not necessarily high) number of publications. The next 5  -  10 years (2nd period) are of great importance to those who stay in research. In that time authors are evaluated on the international scale and their academic position depends heavily on their productivity. Recall also from the Subsection [\ref=subsub:interdisciplinarity] that the small raise in the number of areas joined by researchers falls into this period, as well. The later stages correspond to the scientific maturity when scientific output stabilizes on average.

With respect to the publication rate values, they are much higher for the single-area authors during the spike periods. There is no additional evidence that would help to explain this phenomenon. We might hypothesize that by working in one field only it is easier to get more papers published, since the author knows better the research criteria of his community.

To analyze the author - publication distribution over venues we calculate for each author ai∈ TOP dataset the percentage of his publications in the top-ranked conferences relative to all his publications recorded in DBLP. Next we combine the results into the 10%-intervals and match them against the corresponding percentage of authors.

The results are shown at Figure [\ref=fig:venue_distribution]. It turns out that only about 1.5% of authors in the TOP dataset publish exclusively or mostly at the top-ranked venues. Typically the top-ranked conference publications constitute from 30% to 60% of the author's conference production. It suggests that the majority of researchers appears in the mixed set of venues.

To look closer at the publication distribution over venues in the topical sets we first assign each author ai∈ TOP dataset to the area he contributes at most (frequency based majority voting), and perform the same computation as before .

Figure [\ref=fig:area_venue_distr] presents the results. Notice that majority of areas are dominated by people who publish between 40 - 50% of their publications in the top ranked conferences, and in DP and DMML the prevailing range is 30 - 40%. These values confirm the general tendency of publishing in the mixed set of venues. On the contrary, authors from DB, CRYPTO, AT and NLIR show more adherence to the top-ranked venues as proportion of researchers who publish 50 - 70% of papers at top-ranked conferences outranks the other categories.

Scientific Community Analysis

The previous section dealt with the author characteristic with respect to DBLP and the research areas defined in Section [\ref=sec:data]. In this section we take a closer look at the areas themselves and investigate them in terms of the publication growth rate, collaboration trends, and population stability. Selection of the evaluation criteria is not random. We believe that it may help to highlight the peculiarities of the individual domains and compare them to each other. We apply the same set of features to the subset of the non- top ranked conferences and eventually find out the differences between the top and non-top venues.

Publication Growth Rate

Publication growth rate provides an evidence for the area "well-being" and sheds light on how much interest there is in it at the given moment. It is a dynamic measure that traces yearly changes in the area productivity. We distinguish between the relative and absolute growth rates.

The absolute growth rate AbsGrAi,y of an area Ai in year y is a ratio of publications in Ai within two consecutive years yi and yi  -  1 such that [formula]. We have calculated the values for all areas and found that except for the fluctuations corresponding typically to the beginning years, the fields differ considerably from each other. For example, Computer Architecture (ARCH) and Computer Networks (NET) have stabilized at early 90s, their absolute growths rate values oscillate around 1  ±  0.1. On the contrary, Natural Language Processing and Information Retrieval (NLIR) productivity may vary three times as much from year to year, up to nowadays. Such a diversity could probably result from within-venue conventions that define the number of yearly accepted papers. We therefore compare the conferences in our TOP and NONTOP data sets with regard to the absolute publication growth rate. It turns out to be systematically higher in the non-top conferences. We can translate this result in terms of publication acceptance rates (information that is typically not present in the bibliographic databases though it is one of the important parameters for conference evaluation [\cite=Zhuang:Elmacioglu] [\cite=Yan:Lee]), and conclude that they are lower for the top venues.

The relative growth rate of an area Ai in year y, RGrAi,y is a measure of its activity compared to the overall activity in Computer Science (CS) . It is calculated as a ratio between the area absolute growth rate and the computer science absolute growth rate in the given year: [formula] Thus RGrAi,y  >  1, indicates a raise of interest to the area Ai in some year y.

Figure [\ref=fig:relative_growth] illustrates the idea. As of CS, we observe considerable fluctuations in its growth rate with the overall tendency to raise in the 70s - 1st half of 80s. One possible explanation is that many areas had started off in that period. At the same time the diapason in conference productivity is large in the beginning, and this is the reason why the curve goes up and down rather than increasing steadily. An additional explanation of the unstable behavior of the curve is the incompleteness of the DBLP data for the corresponding period. On the contrary, influx of the new disciplines becomes much smaller from the 2nd half of the 80s on, and we notice only two modest spikes - at the end of 90s and in the first years of 2000 which reflect most probably the contribution of the new-born Computational Biology, and World Wide Web.

We chose DMML and AT to visualize the concept of the relative growth rate. On the background of the global development of CS, the bursts of activity in DMML can be seen in the beginning of 90s, and several times in the 2000s, though on the smaller rate. It corresponds well to the evolution of the area which has become very popular in the late 80s - beginning of 90s and attracts a great deal of attention nowadays. On the contrary, relative growth rate in AT remains most of the time bellow one. We suppose that the same considerations that we have mentioned in Subsection [\ref=sub:career] prevent the area becoming "trendy".

Collaboration trends

Analysis of collaborations shows how much community is connected. One might expect that a highly interdisciplinary area such as Data Mining will exhibit lower connectivity than for example Information Retrieval which is focused on a much smaller number of topics and thus facilitates the collaboration. In addition to the between-area comparison we investigate the difference in collaboration pattern in communities described by the TOP and NONTOP data sets. The collaboration pattern is analyzed in terms of an average number of coauthors per paper and per author, and clustering coefficient which quantifies how close the direct neighbors of a vertex are to form a complete graph [\cite=Watts:Strogatz]. We use co-authorship graphs GCS, GTop, and GnonTop defined in Section [\ref=sec:data] along with publication statistics to perform these computations.

Previous analysis of the co-author network in ACM data set has shown that the number of collaborators per author increases steadily over the years [\cite=Zhuang:Elmacioglu]. It has been confirmed by [\cite=Huang:etal] who used CiteSeer as the experimental testbed. Our results obtained from the DBLP show that the increasing average number of co-authors per authors as well as the average number of authors per paper characterize all the subareas we deal with. Tables [\ref=tab:collaborations_top] and [\ref=tab:collaborations_nontop] summarizes our findings.

In the TOP set data, CBIO and WWW have the highest average number of authors per paper along with the highest clustering coefficient which implies intensive collaborations throughout the entire community. On the contrary, AT, CRYPTO and PL (Programming Languages) have the smallest number of authors per paper, highest percentage of singleton authors and the lowest clustering coefficient among all 14 disciplines. It follows that in these three areas authors have a strong preference for working in small groups when collaborating. Moreover these groups turn to be weakly connected which results in a network composed of rather isolated cliques. It is worth mentioning that [\cite=Bird:etal] found that among other CS areas, CRYPTO has the highest collaborative assortativity. Assortativity [\cite=Newman:28] quantifies how much a vertex in the network is connected to alike vertices. Collaborative assortativity reflects the tendency of authors to collaborate with those authors who have similar number of coauthors. This selectivity in collaboration pattern scales well with our assumption about sparseness of the cryptographic community. A bit surprisingly but the figures in the table do not confirm our assumption about the connectivity of DMML and NLIR. The higher percentage of coauthors per author coming from the same area (63%) in NLIR proves its lower interdisciplinarity compared to DMML where ≈  51% coauthors per author belong to other disciplines. However it does not seem to have an impact on the connectivity pattern, and the clustering coefficient of NLIR is a little smaller than that of DMML. Alternatively it can be explained by the fraction of working alone authors (singletons) which is almost twice as much in NLIR as in DMML and naturally lows down the connectivity rate of the former. The weak relation between the interdisciplinarity of a field and its connectivity is best seen with {GV (Graphics), SEC (Security)} pair. The clustering coefficient of both is slightly above average (0.67 and 0.68 vs 0.65). At the same time GV is the most homogeneous area out of all 14 (73% of coauthors per authors belong to GV), while SEC is the most heterogeneous one: only 40% of coauthors per authors come from the same discipline.

The data in Table [\ref=tab:collaborations_top] reveals that on average only 43% of coauthors per author belong to the set of authors publishing at top ranked conferences. It is in line with the author/venue distribution discussed in Subsection [\ref=subsub:performance], and confirms that the same researchers publish at top and non-top ranked venues. In general, the NONTOP set (Table [\ref=tab:collaborations_nontop]) is featured by the slightly higher number of authors per paper and higher clustering coefficient (DB is an exception), although the values are close in both sets. Note also that if we were to sort the areas by the clustering coefficient, the order would be the same as in the TOP set (DB and DMML switched around). However we have no sufficient evidence to conclude whether or not the non-top ranked conferences exhibit distinctive behavior in this setting compared to the top-ranked venues.

Population Stability

In Section [\ref=sec:authors] we discussed area interdisciplinarity as suggested by author transitions between the fields. In this section we concentrate on the mechanism that influence researcher dynamics. For this we analyze changes in conference populations in terms of new members that join a venue ( newcomers), and those who leave it, leavers. In the context of this section, the large communities corresponding to the research areas are decomposed into the conferences each of which is understood as an individual community.

In [\cite=Kleinberg:etal] it has been pointed out that the membership in a community may be influenced by fact of having "friends" in that community. Thus some researchers are more likely to submit their paper to a conference if they have previously coauthored with someone who had already published over there. The theory has been tested on LiveJournal and DBLP (set of 84 conferences with at least 15 years history) communities. We take on this approach and investigate whether this property holds equally in different areas and venues. We therefore define:

Newcomer Newck,y: an author who had no publications at conference ck before year y. We define a fraction of newcomers in a conference ck in the year y as [formula];

Pure newcomer Pnewck,y: an author who had neither publications nor has he coauthored with an author already member of ck before year y. The pure newcomers are calculated as [formula];

Leaver Leaverck,y: an author who has no more publications in ck after year y. The fraction of leavers in ck,y is formalized as [formula].

Results of the computations are given in Tables [\ref=tab:stability_top], [\ref=tab:stability_nontop]. Due tot he space considerations we show only the most interesting results.

Let us discuss some of the TOP set conferences. All venues in AT and CRYPTO prove stable and moreover are the most stable venues in the whole TOP set. They are characterized by low percentage of Newcomers, Pure newcomers, and Leavers, compared to the average values across the whole TOP set. Note that fraction of Pure newcomers is an important parameter as it sheds light on how "friendship" phenomenon affects the inflow of the new authors: the higher the fraction is, the smaller is the friendship influence. We have found that AT and CRYPTO are friendship driven as about 50% of new authors joining venues have co-authored with authors who had already published over there.

Contrarily to the two fields above, WWW conferences are the most dynamic ones, featured by the high values for the Newcomers, Pure newcomers, and Leavers' fractions. Friendship does not seem to alter the influx of new authors as the Pure newcomers typically count for ≈  60 - 80% of all the Newcomers. Note that the member conferences are young - except of ISWC that has started off in 1997 all other venues have appeared in 2000s. It is natural to postulate that the population stability of a venue is directly related to its age. In the given set of conferences, our assumption is immediately confirmed by the ISWC which has the lowest values for all three aspects. Note however that the above relation holds in many but not all the cases. Thus for example in Security, CSFW (1988) is less dynamic than S&P (1980), and ICCAD (1990), the most stable community in Architecture, is much younger than ISCA (1973) which scores second in terms of stability. The interpretation of these observations is that while population stability does depend to the certain extent on the conference age, it is also influenced by other, conference specific factors.

The key observation concerning the NONTOP set of venues, is that all of them irrespective of time span (which ranges from 17 to 3 years) and domain, are very dynamic. (The only exceptions are ICCS and DLT (AT) whose behavior is closer to AT venues from the TOP set). Typically the Newcomers constitute about 75  -  85% of all authors, and the average value of the Pure newcomers is about 75% which suggests that the friendship influence on the decision to join a venue is rather negligible. The turnover of authors is also remarkable since the fraction of Leavers is often comparable to that of Newcomers and constitutes up to 88% of all the authors. As such, population stability might be considered as a candidate feature that helps to distinguish between the top and non-top venues.

Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we have analyzed computer science communities in different settings. We a performed statistical analysis of authors, and found that the DBLP community is dominated by the short-time researchers whose career does not exceed 5 years. We have also discovered that experienced scientists from the top-ranked venues tend to join multiple research communities and produce the highest number of publications between the 5th and 10th years of their career. Typically they publish in a mixture of top and non-top ranked venues.

We have also compared communities from 14 research areas of computer science and performed the between-area comparison in terms of publication growth rate, collaboration trends and population stability. In addition, we applied the same criteria to the comparison between top and non-top ranked conferences and discovered that the publication growth rate and population stability could be among the features that help to separate the two sets.

In this approach we have manually divided the broad area of computer science into 14 topics. In the future we plan to substitute this rather ad hoc approach by applying a machine learning technique such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation [\cite=Blei:2003] for both - topic classification and learning the best number of topics into which the given data can be divided. By doing this we will avoid the subjectivity of manual classification. We also plan to elaborate on the set of features that could be used for efficient comparison and eventually automatic ranking of venues. Besides we plan to extend the notion of "venue" to incorporate journals into analysis.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Prof. Christoph Schommer for his critical reading, valuable comments and helpful suggestions.

Math Equations

You may want to display math equations in three distinct styles: inline, numbered or non-numbered display. Each of the three are discussed in the next sections.

Inline (In-text) Equations

A formula that appears in the running text is called an inline or in-text formula. It is produced by the math environment, which can be invoked with the usual '134begin. . .'134end construction or with the short form $. . .$. You can use any of the symbols and structures, from α to ω, available in [\cite=Lamport:LaTeX]; this section will simply show a few examples of in-text equations in context. Notice how this equation: , set here in in-line math style, looks slightly different when set in display style. (See next section).

Display Equations

A numbered display equation - one set off by vertical space from the text and centered horizontally - is produced by the equation environment. An unnumbered display equation is produced by the displaymath environment.

Again, in either environment, you can use any of the symbols and structures available in ; this section will just give a couple of examples of display equations in context. First, consider the equation, shown as an inline equation above:

[formula]

Notice how it is formatted somewhat differently in the displaymath environment. Now, we'll enter an unnumbered equation: and follow it with another numbered equation:

[formula]

just to demonstrate 's able handling of numbering.

Citations

Citations to articles [\cite=bowman:reasoning] [\cite=clark:pct] [\cite=braams:babel] [\cite=herlihy:methodology], conference proceedings [\cite=clark:pct] or books [\cite=salas:calculus] [\cite=Lamport:LaTeX] listed in the Bibliography section of your article will occur throughout the text of your article. You should use BibTeX to automatically produce this bibliography; you simply need to insert one of several citation commands with a key of the item cited in the proper location in the .tex file [\cite=Lamport:LaTeX]. The key is a short reference you invent to uniquely identify each work; in this sample document, the key is the first author's surname and a word from the title. This identifying key is included with each item in the .bib file for your article.

The details of the construction of the .bib file are beyond the scope of this sample document, but more information can be found in the Author's Guide, and exhaustive details in the  User's Guide[\cite=Lamport:LaTeX].

This article shows only the plainest form of the citation command, using '134cite. This is what is stipulated in the SIGS style specifications. No other citation format is endorsed or supported.

Tables

Because tables cannot be split across pages, the best placement for them is typically the top of the page nearest their initial cite. To ensure this proper "floating" placement of tables, use the environment table to enclose the table's contents and the table caption. The contents of the table itself must go in the tabular environment, to be aligned properly in rows and columns, with the desired horizontal and vertical rules. Again, detailed instructions on tabular material is found in the  User's Guide.

Immediately following this sentence is the point at which Table 1 is included in the input file; compare the placement of the table here with the table in the printed dvi output of this document.

To set a wider table, which takes up the whole width of the page's live area, use the environment table* to enclose the table's contents and the table caption. As with a single-column table, this wide table will "float" to a location deemed more desirable. Immediately following this sentence is the point at which Table 2 is included in the input file; again, it is instructive to compare the placement of the table here with the table in the printed dvi output of this document.

Figures

Like tables, figures cannot be split across pages; the best placement for them is typically the top or the bottom of the page nearest their initial cite. To ensure this proper "floating" placement of figures, use the environment figure to enclose the figure and its caption.

This sample document contains examples of .eps and .ps files to be displayable with . More details on each of these is found in the Author's Guide.

As was the case with tables, you may want a figure that spans two columns. To do this, and still to ensure proper "floating" placement of tables, use the environment figure* to enclose the figure and its caption. and don't forget to end the environment with figure*, not figure!

Note that either .ps or .eps formats are used; use the '134epsfig or '134psfig commands as appropriate for the different file types.

Theorem-like Constructs

Other common constructs that may occur in your article are the forms for logical constructs like theorems, axioms, corollaries and proofs. There are two forms, one produced by the command '134newtheorem and the other by the command '134newdef; perhaps the clearest and easiest way to distinguish them is to compare the two in the output of this sample document:

This uses the theorem environment, created by the'134newtheorem command:

Let f be continuous on

[formula]

, then

The other uses the definition environment, created by the '134newdef command:

If z is irrational, then by ez we mean the unique number which has logarithm z:

Two lists of constructs that use one of these forms is given in the Author's Guidelines.

There is one other similar construct environment, which is already set up for you; i.e. you must not use a '134newdef command to create it: the proof environment. Here is a example of its use:

Suppose on the contrary there exists a real number L such that Then which contradicts our assumption that l  ≠  0.

Complete rules about using these environments and using the two different creation commands are in the Author's Guide; please consult it for more detailed instructions. If you need to use another construct, not listed therein, which you want to have the same formatting as the Theorem or the Definition[\cite=salas:calculus] shown above, use the '134newtheorem or the '134newdef command, respectively, to create it.

A Caveat for the  Expert

Because you have just been given permission to use the '134newdef command to create a new form, you might think you can use 's '134def to create a new command: Please refrain from doing this! Remember that your  source code is primarily intended to create camera-ready copy, but may be converted to other forms - e.g. HTML. If you inadvertently omit some or all of the '134defs recompilation will be, to say the least, problematic.

Conclusions

This paragraph will end the body of this sample document. Remember that you might still have Acknowledgments or Appendices; brief samples of these follow. There is still the Bibliography to deal with; and we will make a disclaimer about that here: with the exception of the reference to the  book, the citations in this paper are to articles which have nothing to do with the present subject and are used as examples only.

Acknowledgments

This section is optional; it is a location for you to acknowledge grants, funding, editing assistance and what have you. In the present case, for example, the authors would like to thank Gerald Murray of ACM for his help in codifying this Author's Guide and the .cls and .tex files that it describes.

Headings in Appendices

The rules about hierarchical headings discussed above for the body of the article are different in the appendices. In the appendix environment, the command section is used to indicate the start of each Appendix, with alphabetic order designation (i.e. the first is A, the second B, etc.) and a title (if you include one). So, if you need hierarchical structure within an Appendix, start with subsection as the highest level. Here is an outline of the body of this document in Appendix-appropriate form:

Introduction

The Body of the Paper

Type Changes and Special Characters

Math Equations

Inline (In-text) Equations

Display Equations

Citations

Tables

Figures

Theorem-like Constructs

Conclusions

Acknowledgments

Additional Authors

This section is inserted by ; you do not insert it. You just add the names and information in the '134additionalauthors command at the start of the document.

References

Generated by bibtex from your  .bib file. Run latex, then bibtex, then latex twice (to resolve references) to create the  .bbl file. Insert that  .bbl file into the .tex source file and comment out the command '134thebibliography.

More Help for the Hardy

The sig-alternate.cls file itself is chock-full of succinct and helpful comments. If you consider yourself a moderately experienced to expert user of , you may find reading it useful but please remember not to change it.