Quantum Formalism: brief epistemological considerations.

Platonism.

We are going to analyze the quantum superposition, while in the next section, starting from Platonic view (where the math world is the ontic element), we will argue about the possible consequences of the analysis on : (i)the notion of information and computability of the system (ii)the math tool and (iii)the correspondent physical reality.

Basic: Quantum superposition.

As we know, the essential difference of the quantum mechanical concept of reality from usual classical reality is that in quantum mechanics the properties of material systems, as they are observed in a measurement, may not exist before the observation (measurement process). If for example the measurement shows that a particle is located in one of two points A1, A2, this particle may be located neither in A1, nor in A2 before the measurement. Moreover are not considerate the finite spatial and temporal differentiation of the physical world, which implies that no physical system can, during a finite time span T, be in an infinite number of states such that each state is distinct from (orthogonal to) its immediate predecessor. To see how this plays out in real physics, consider the quantum superposition:

[formula]

in case of simple quantum superposition of two eigenstates φ1, φ2, we find the following state of the particle before the measurement: ψ = c1φ1 + c2φ2, this superposition of states is localized correspondingly in in A1 and A2. According to von Neumann reduction postulate, after the measurement distinguishing between these two alternatives, the system having been previously in the state ψ goes over into one of the states ψ1 and ψ2, with the corresponding probabilities |c1|2 and |c2|2. This postulate corresponds to what is observed in real measurements, so the reduction postulate is accepted as the basis for the quantum-mechanical calculations. However, as we know, it contradicts to the linearity of quantum mechanics when the process of measurement is considered as an interaction of two systems (the measured system and the measuring device).

Platonism and Complex numbers.

In this view, the ontic element is the math world. Speaking of quantum superposition the amplitudes c1 and c2 are complex numbers which, in general, demand an infinite amount of information to specify them precisely. The state does not compute in the (resource-limited) universe; it computes in the (infinitely resourced) Platonic realm, where they can be subjected to infinitely precise idealized mathematical operations such as unitary evolution. In this framework, mathematical equations describe not merely some limited aspects of the physical world, but all aspects of it. It means that there is some mathematical structure that is what mathematicians call isomorphic, and hence equivalent, to our physical world, with each physical entity having a unique counterpart in the mathematical structure and vice versa. We are asking if this mathematical structure is necessary and useful? In other words, the "infinite" structure give us more information about a system respect a finite structure. It is a correct statement? We are going the analyze the second assumption.

Idealism.

In this second assumption, the ontic element is: all possible data of the system. Now, we are obliged to assume that the universe computes in the (same)universe, and there is not an infinite source of free information in a Platonic realm at the disposal of Nature. The bound on universe applies to all forms of information, including such numbers as c1 and c2, and to the dynamical evolution of the state vector ψ, and is not merely a bound on the number of degrees of freedom in the universe (or on the dimensionality of Hilbert space). We are interested to know who is getting all these possible data. Until now, we have not not speak about any observer or device. Is not necessary to introduce an observer[\cite=Rov]. We do not force to introduce any split between "objects". In the realm, that we call "Idealism", we accept a finite information and computability. An important difference between Platonism is that, here, we believe that all these denumerable data belong to the "someone", this object is not necessary to be an human observer. According this view, the world is not completely mathematical, it means that mathematical equations describe merely some limited aspects of the possible finite "data" world. In this case the finite data world could to fix rules in that of infinite mathematical world. While the mathematical world seem an external and internal Idealism , the data world seem an idealism concentrate to the "subject".

Realism.

We are going to analyze third case: the Realism. We leaved the Platonic realm. The complex numbers "collapse" to real numbers (c1 and c2). The state of matter is the ontic element. We have a finite information and computability ( like second case), here, we cannot speak about any Complex Spaces. The math tools is different. The same equation (e.g.superposition) change his nature (now the problems are linked to real numbers, integers). Moreover we have to consider a finite spatial and temporal differentiation of the physical world, which implies that no physical system can, during a finite time span T, be in an infinite number of states such that each state is distinct from (orthogonal to) its immediate predecessor. In this realistic framework, we conclude with the following citation (Pearle[\cite=Pea1]): There is a big difference between a conditional statement and an absolute statement: "if you win the lottery then you will get ten million dollars" can't compare with "you have won the lottery and you get ten million dollars." The statements of Standard QM are conditional.Faced with the statevector c1|a1 >  + c2|a2  >  , Standard QM says "if this is the description of a completed measurement then the physical state is |a1  >   or |a2  >  ." But actually, what the if is conditioned upon, what the words "a completed measurement" mean......Qm fails to predict a physical phenomenon, namely that an event does--or does not--occur. Phenomenological models are introduced into physics to describe phenomena that present theory fails to adequately treat. Collapse models are phenomenological models. Their statements are absolute.Faced with the statevector c1|a1 >  + c2|a2  >  , the collapse model says that represents the physical state. If you wait a bit, it may happen that the statevector is unchanged, and that's that. Or, it may occur that the statevector rapidly evolves to |a1  >   or |a2  >  , and again that's that. By "that's that" is meant, in all cases, that the statevector represents the physical state: the model tells you whether or not an event occurred. A summary of the positions regarding c1 and c2:

Conclusion.

We conclude with the following table and citation:

(Nikoli[\cite=Nic]):Textbooks on QM usually emphasize the pragmatic technical aspects, while the discussions of the conceptual issues are usually avoided or reduced to simple authoritative claims without a detailed discussion. This causes a common (but wrong!) impression among physicists that all conceptual problems of QM are already solved or that the unsolved problems are not really physical (but rather "philosophical").