F.G. Watson†, A.P. Oates‡, R. Fong* & C.A. Collins§ *Physics Dept., Univ. of Durham, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, U.K. † Anglo-Australian Observatory, Coonabarabran, NSW 2357, Australia. ‡ Royal Greenwich Observatory, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, U.K. § Astrophysics Group, Liverpool-John-Moores Univ., Liverpool, L3 3AF, U.K.

We report on results from the Durham/UKST Galaxy Redshift Survey where we have found large scale "cellular" features in the galaxy distribution. These have spatial 2-point correlation function power significantly in excess of the predictions of the standard cold dark matter cosmological model1, supporting the previous observational results from the APM survey[formula]. At smaller scales, the 1-D pairwise galaxy velocity dispersion is measured to be + 96- 62 kms- 1 which is also inconsistent with the prediction of the standard cold dark matter model1. Finally, the survey has produced the most significant detection yet of large scale redshift space distortions due to dynamical infall of galaxies4. An estimate of Ω0.6 / b  =  0.55  ±  0.12 is obtained which is consistent either with a low density Universe or a critical density Universe where galaxies are biased tracers of the mass.

The principal aims of the Durham/UKST Galaxy Redshift Survey are to investigate the structure and dynamics of the Universe on scales 1-100h- 1Mpc (where h is Hubble's constant in units of 100 kms- 1 Mpc- 1). The survey was constructed by measuring the redshifts for 1 in 3 of the galaxies from the Edinburgh/Durham Southern Galaxy Catalogue5 (EDSGC) to bJ≃17m. The resulting survey contains ~  2500 redshifts, covers a [formula] contiguous area of the sky at the South Galactic Pole and probes to a depth of >  300h- 1Mpc with a median depth of ~  150h- 1Mpc. The total volume of space surveyed is ~  4  ×  106h- 3Mpc3, approximately six times that of the updated Southern Sky Redshift Survey6, due to our ~  2.5m fainter limit.

Figure 1 shows the distribution of the galaxies in right ascension and velocity for each of four, [formula], declination slices. The survey gives the striking impression that the galaxy distribution is "cellular" or "bubble-like" on 50-100h- 1Mpc scales. The most noticeable structure is the low density region lying between 0 and 90h- 1Mpc surrounded by long "walls" of galaxies. This structure is present in the slices at [formula], [formula] and [formula] and was referred to as the Sculptor Void in earlier, shallower surveys7,8. In the most northerly slice at [formula] there is evidence that we are seeing the top of this structure and that it is indeed a "cell". Figure 2 shows the histogram of galaxy number with distance which has several large peaks, also indicating the presence of large scale structure. However, it should be noted that at least one of these peaks (eg. at ~  90h- 1Mpc) does not follow the 128h- 1Mpc periodic pattern previously claimed9 along the North-South Galactic Pole axis which intersects our survey at ~  0h54m, [formula], crossing the nearer and further Sculptor superclusters. Figure 1 clearly reveals a galaxy distribution that is more complex than any simple periodic pattern.

To test the significance of these large scale features, we have made a statistical investigation of the galaxy distribution in the Durham/UKST survey by calculating the redshift space 2-point correlation function10, ξ(s). This is a measure of the excess probability of finding two galaxies in given volume elements at separations s over what is expected for a homogeneous galaxy distribution. In figure 3a we compare the Durham/UKST ξ(s) with that from other optical redshift surveys3,11,12. On small scales (<  10h- 1Mpc) we see that there is good agreement between all the surveys. On large scales (>  10h- 1Mpc) we see that our new estimate is consistent with the detection of large scale power from the APM-Stromlo survey but less consistent with the previous Durham surveys. This inconsistency is thought to be partly statistical and partly due to the previous use of a simple unweighted estimator which, although having minimum errors, was systematically biased against the detection of large scale power (Ratcliffe , in preparation). Our new estimate is also consistent with that found from the QDOT infrared redshift survey13. Figure 3b shows the Durham/UKST ξ(s) with the results from mock catalogues drawn from two sets of cold dark matter1 (CDM) N-body simulations14,15,16 ; standard CDM with Ωh  =  0.5, b = 1.6 (SCDM) and CDM with Ωh  =  0.2, b = 1 and a cosmological constant (Λ  ≠  0) to ensure a spatially flat cosmology (LCDM), where Ω is the mean mass density of the Universe and b is the linear bias parameter relating the galaxy and underlying matter distributions, (Δρ  /  ρ)g  =  b(Δρ  /  ρ)m. The mock catalogues were constructed with the same angular and radial selection functions as the Durham/UKST survey. On small scales (<  10h- 1Mpc) both CDM models agree well with the data. On large scales (>  10h- 1Mpc) SCDM shows no significant large scale power whereas LCDM shows significant power out to ~  30h- 1Mpc. The data therefore shows significant excess power at ~   15-30h- 1Mpc over SCDM (>  3σ). LCDM is more consistent with the data at these scales, although even this model produces too little power at the 2σ level. This rejection of SCDM in our new survey is consistent with the findings from the APM correlation functions2,3.

Inferring galaxy distances from redshifts results in the distortion of the clustering pattern because of the non-Hubble component of galaxy velocities. This anisotropy along the line of sight can be used to estimate some important cosmological parameters describing the dynamics of the Universe4,10. Figure 4a shows a contour plot of the 2-point correlation function, ξv(σ,π), where σ and π are the perpendicular and parallel separations to the line of sight, respectively. On small, non-linear scales the contours are elongated parallel to the line of sight caused by the rms virial velocities of galaxies. Using standard techniques10 to model this smearing of ξ by the peculiar velocities, we find [formula] kms- 1 at perpendicular separations σ  <  2h- 1Mpc. Assuming that simple biasing models apply17, this is inconsistent with the SCDM prediction1 of ~  1000 kms- 1 but nearer the LCDM prediction1 of ~  600 kms- 1. On large, linear scales the contours are compressed parallel to the line of sight caused by the infall of galaxies into overdense regions. We use two independent methods to estimate Ω0.6 / b as shown in figure 4b. Firstly, using the spherical harmonic moments18 ([formula]) of ξv(σ,π) to measure the shape of the contours of constant ξ, we find Ω0.6 / b  =  0.55  ±  0.12 in the region 9-23h- 1Mpc. Secondly, using the enhancement in redshift space4 of the volume integral of ξ (J3) over the real space one, we find Ω0.6 / b  =  0.48  ±  0.18, quoting the result at 10h- 1Mpc, which is representative. Our measured values of Ω0.6 / b can be compared with other optical values of Ω0.6 / b estimated from redshift space distortions, namely 0.48  ±  0.12 (Loveday , manuscript submitted), 0.77  ±  0.1619 and 0.5  ±  0.2520. All of these values agree within 2σ of our results. Thus taking two fiducial values for b, b = 1 implies Ω  =  0.37  ±  0.15 and b = 2 implies Ω  =  1.17  ±  0.31. This result tends to argue against an unbiased critical density, Ω  =  1, Universe, but favours a biased, Ω  =  1, Universe or an unbiased, low Ω, Universe.

Thus our Ω0.6 / b result agrees with the SCDM and LCDM models but, since they both predict Ω0.6 / b  ~   0.4-0.6, we cannot discriminate between them. However, we have shown that SCDM underpredicts our 2-point correlation function results at large scales and overpredicts the 1-D pairwise velocity dispersion at small scales. Therefore, overall, our results argue for a model with a density perturbation spectrum more skewed towards large scales, such as LCDM.