cm cm

ILC Instrumentation R&D at SCIPP

The LSTFE Time-Over-Threshold Readout ASIC

The LSTFE ASIC features a long (~   1.5 μs) shaping time, typical for ILC silicon sensor readout applications, that limits readout noise from capacitive and series-resistance load. After amplification and shaping, the signals are split in two and directed to two separate comparators. One runs at a high (~   1.2 fC) threshold to suppress noise, while the other runs at a low (~   0.4 fC) threshold to maximize the information used in constructing the centroid of pulses that trigger the high threshold. The charge-amplitude measurement is provided by the duration of low-threshold comparator's time-over-threshold, which, in a full implementation of the ASIC, would be stored digitally in an on-board FIFO and read out asynchronously. The chip includes a power-cycling feature that is designed to allow the chip to be powered on in 1 msec, allowing the chip to reduce its power consumption by 99% by exploiting the 5 Hz duty cycle of the Linear Collider. Figure [\ref=Fig:noise] shows the observed noise performance of the LSTFE-I prototype ASIC, as a function of capacitive load. The best-fit line yields

[formula]

in equivalent electrons per pF.

A refined LSTFE-II prototype has been fabricated, and is being readied for testing at the SCIPP laboratory. Due to unanticipated leakage currents, the switch-on time of the LSTFE-I was degraded to 30 msec; this has been addressed in the design of the LSTFE-II by adding low-power feedback loops that cancel leakage currents during the nominal power-off phase. The design includes an additional intermediate amplification stage that should allow further improvements in signal-to-noise and channel-to-channel matching. The return-to-baseline has been hastened through a re-configuration of the pulse-shaping feedback circuitry, which should improve the time-over-threshold resolution. The signal-to-noise performance has been optimized for an 80 cm ladder (approximately 100 pF load), which is more likely for an ILC long-ladder application than the original target of 167 cm. The chip has 128 channels (256 comparators) whose outputs are sampled at 3 MHz, and multiplexed at 32:1 into eight 100 MHz LVDS outputs. The group is planning to use the LSTFE-II in a test-beam run in mid-2009.

Charge Division with Resistive Sensors

We have begun to explore the possibility of using charge division across a resistive readout channel [\cite=owen] [\cite=radeka] [\cite=pullia] to obtain information about the longitudinal coordinate of the deposition of minimum-ionizing particles. To this end, the SiD sensor fabrication included a short (5 cm) test sensor for which there was supposed to be direct connectivity with the resistive implant (total resistance specified to be 600 kΩ), with no metal strip connecting the readout pads at the near and far ends of the implant. Due to an error in the fabrication process, the metal strip was included, with essentially continuous connectivity to the length of the implant, rendering resistive charge division studies impossible.

Instead, a hardware simulation of the resistive readout was developed, using a PC board loaded with discrete components that approximate the distributed RC network of the planned SiD charge division sensor prototype. The total resistance of 600 kΩ, and an assumed capacitance of 1.2 pF/cm, were divided into 10 discrete sections, with either end read out by commercial TI OPA657 low-noise FET operational amplifiers. Two later amplification stages, making use of Analog Devices ADA4851 rail-to-rail video amps, were used to shape the readout pulse and provide a rise-time of 2.0 μs.

Injecting charge at the circuit's discrete nodes produced the expected linear charge division between the near- and far-end amplifiers, to within measurement errors. By injecting charge through the introduction of a voltage step across a known capacitance, the gain was calibrated, allowing an expression of readout noise in terms of equivalent charge. Table [\ref=tab:div_noise] shows the equivalent-charge readout noise for several different readout configurations.

The value of 0.26 fC obtained with the input to the near-end amplifier grounded suggests that the level of noise introduced by the commercial preamplifier, while not ideal, is not dominant when the resistive strip is read out. Since the dynamic impedance of the amplifier chain is expected to be small relative to the network load resistance, one would expect little difference in noise if the far end amplifier input is grounded, and the amplifier on that end is disconnected; that was indeed observed. However, the reduction in noise that was observed when the far end of the network was disconnected and floated is not understood.

To explore this further, the correlation between the near- and far-end amplifier noise was measured, which is expected to show anti-correlation if dominated by the resistive component of the load network [\cite=radeka]. A correlation coefficient consistent with zero was measured; if instead, the network was replaced by a single 600 kΩ resistor, a correlation coefficient of ρ  =   - 0.51 was measured. This suggests that RC network effects may be reducing the correlation between the near- and far-end readout noise, which would in fact be beneficial for the precision of the charge-division measurement (see below). A SPICE simulation of the network and readout is being developed, so that the behavior can be understood more rigorously.

If N,F are the near- and far-end signals, respectively, than the fractional longitudinal coordinate measurement is given by f  =  (N - F) / (N + F), with an uncertainty

[formula]

[formula]

[formula]

from which it can be seen that anti-correlation between the near- and far-end amplifiers would worsen the longitudinal coordinate measurement. Using the measured noise characteristics, assuming no correlation between the two ends, and a 4 fC deposition in the center of the network, a fractional resolution of 0.23 (2.3 cm for a 10 cm sensor) is estimated. While this is only moderately better than [formula], there is still much to be done in terms of understanding and optimizing the charge-division technique.

Microstrip Sensor Readout Noise for ILC Applications

Readout noise depends upon many factors, including series and parallel resistive loads (RS, RB), series and parallel amplifier noise (ena, ina), capacitive load (C), and leakage current (Id). According to [\cite=spieler], these factors contribute to the overall equivalent-electron noise as

[formula]

where τ is the rise time, Fi and Fv are signal shape parameters of order one that characterize the amplifier response to current and voltage noise sources respectively, and Af is the contribution from 1 / f noise.

With its emphasis on precision, ILC silicon strip applications tend to employ narrow and/or long strips, which leads to significant series resistance. Taken at face value, this expression suggests that the readout noise is likely to be limited by the series noise contribution, even at the relatively large shaping times expected for ILC applications.

The SCIPP ILC group has been interested in exploring the series contribution to readout noise, and developing mitigating approaches (such as reading the ladder out from its center rather than from either end) to reduce the series noise contribution should it be dominant. Initial studies done with a long ladder, read out by the LSTFE-I prototype, and composed of auxiliary sensors from the GLAST production run that have a strip width of 65 μm, showed roughly the expected dependence of readout noise on ladder length. However, even at the longest ladder length that was tested (143 cm), the expectation from [\cite=spieler] is that series resistive noise was only about 20% greater than the contribution from the purely capacitive term, so it was difficult to be confident about the size of the contribution from series noise. In addition, reading the ladder out from the center, which might be expected to reduce the series noise contribution by a factor of two, produced no appreciable reduction in noise.

To explore this further, the group has attempted to build a long ladder out of unused CDF Layer00 sensors, which have a strip resistance of 40 Ω/cm, approximately three times that of the GLAST sensors, and which should thus exhibit readout noise dominated by series resistance for ladder lengths of 50 cm or more. Because these sensors were intended for short shaping-time applications, the bias resistance used (approximately 0.6 MΩ) would dominate if read out by the LSTFE-I. Thus, the bias resistors were severed with a focussed laser beam, and several strips were biased with 30 MΩ through a micro-jig developed at SCIPP. For a single CDF Layer00 sensor, the group observes ~  20% greater noise than expected from experience with the GLAST sensors, and is working to identify and eliminate the extraneous contribution. The group hopes to soon have results from a longer, series-resistance-dominated ladder.

Summary

SCIPP continues to make headway in R&D areas specific to the application of silicon strip detectors to the ILC (LSTFE ASIC development) as well as in areas with more generic uses (charge division, series resistance contribution to readout noise). The group hopes to have new results soon on the refined LSTFE-II prototype chip, which will be suitable for use in a test-beam run, as well an improvement of the understanding of series noise. The group will also continue to optimize the charge-division strategy, with hopes of finding an operating strategy that significantly improves on the intrinsic [formula] longitudinal resolution while preserving the performance in the dimension transverse to the strips.