Magnetic Field Effect and Dielectric Anomalies at the Spin Reorientation Phase Transition of GdFe3(BO3)4

GdFe3(BO3)4 belongs to the trigonal system with space group R32. It is similar to huntite CaMg3(CO3)4, a trigonal trapezohedral structure that is one of the five trigonal types. Borate crystals of this category are appealing because of their possible applications as single crystal minilasers due to their good luminescent and nonlinear optical properties. In particular for GdFe3(BO3)4 single crystals, recent studies have focused on the better understanding of its optical properties and at the same time on its magnetic properties through phase matching of absorption and second harmonic generation spectra.[formula] The magnetic properties of the rare-earth iron borates are also of fundamental interest because of the existence and mutual interference of two magnetic subsystems (Fe and Gd). It is of fundamental importance the understanding of the magnetic orders of the gadolinium and iron sublattices and the coupling between the iron spins and the gadolinium moments which contributes to the crystal's rich magnetic properties.

The crystal structure of huntite has been analyzed and described elsewhere[formula], it consists of GdO6 bipyramids and FeO6 octahedrons. The octahedrons form 3-fold helicoidal chains along the c-axis. The bipyramids are located between nearly three equal distant octahedrons. Rare-earth iron borates, RFe3(BO3)4 (R=Eu to Ho and Y), undergo a structural transition at higher temperatures and an antiferromagnetic (AFM) transition involving the Fe spins at TN  ≈  35 K.[formula] For R=Gd a weakly first order structural phase transition at T1=156 K changes the structural symmetry from R32 to P3121. [formula] A second order phase transition at TN=36 K results in the AFM ordering of the Fe3 + magnetic moments aligned in the basal plane. At TSR=9 K, another sharp phase transition occurs characterized by a spin reorientation of the Fe3 + magnetic moments by 90 degrees from the basal plane to the c-axis.

The coupling between the Gd moments and the Fe spins at low temperatures is strong in GdFe3(BO3)4 and it was speculated that the reorientation of the AFM iron spin system is triggered by the anisotropy of the Gd moments aligned with the c-axis.[formula] This exchange interaction is indirect and involves other ions such as oxygen in the structure. Below TN, with decreasing temperature, the magnetic order grows and that causes strain via the spin-lattice interaction. At the spin reorientation phase transition the magnetic order experiences a sudden change which is reflected in distinct anomalies of the dielectric constant, ε, as recently discussed in several rare-earth manganites.[formula] The dielectric constant can be measured with extraordinary precision and it monitors subtle changes of the magnetic system. We have therefore searched for dielectric anomalies at the magnetic phase transitions in GdFe3(BO3)4 and its correlation with magnetic and heat capacity data. Below TN, close to TSR, we found two distinct anomalies of ε that separate in temperature with applied magnetic fields. A sharp drop of ε occurs at the reorientation of the Fe spins whereas a maximum of ε(T) above TSR indicates the onset of magnetic field induced ferroelectric order. The spin reorientation phase transition is proven to be of the first order nature through the magnetic Clausius-Clapeyron equation. Lastly, a phase diagram is proposed for magnetic fields parallel or perpendicular to the crystalline c-axis.

The single crystal GdFe3(BO3)4 was grown as described elsewhere.[formula] The transparent crystal (shining green in color) was analyzed and oriented using a GADDS x-ray diffractometer. The heat capacity data was acquired via Quantum Design's Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) under the application of magnetic fields of up to 6 kOe both along a- and c-axis (we use the hexagonal coordinate system in which [formula]). DC magnetization data was measured employing Quantum Design's Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) in magnetic fields parallel to a and c. Smaller portions of the crystal were cut from an original crystal in order to align the two desired crystallographic orientations for dielectric investigations. Silver paint was used as electrodes for the dielectric measurements and the sample was mounted onto a home-made capacitance probe that was adapted to the PPMS. The capacitance was measured by the high precision capacitance bridge AH2500A (Andeen Hagerling) operating at a frequency of 1 kHz. The temperature and magnetic fields were controlled by the PPMS when the dielectric constant was measured.

The three known phase transitions are reflected in different anomalies of the dielectric constant (Fig. 1). At T1=156 K, the dielectric constant drops significantly since the transition is a structural one. T1 does not depend on magnetic field. The magnetic transition into the AFM2 phase at TN is distinguished by a change in slope of εc and a minimum of εa at 36 K. Below TN, εa starts increasing with decreasing T and develops the peak-like feature at TSR, the transition into the AFM1 phase, as shown in Fig. 1. This is a clear signature of lattice softening and it has to be correlated with the changes in the magnetic order at and below TN. A similar, but positive slope change at TN is observed in εc. This behavior is analogous to the magnetic data which will be discussed later. In a system where there are two magnetic subsystems present with one of them being a d-metal and the other one an f-metal subsystem, the f-metal is magnetically polarized upon the ordering of the d-metal subsystem.[formula] In GdFe3(BO3)4 the gadolinium develops an AFM order along the c-axis through inter planar exchange interactions mediated by the Gd-O-Fe bonds below TN. The dielectric anomalies observed at the magnetic phase transitions are an indication of strong spin-lattice interactions and are attributed to magneto-elastic effects similar to those observed in some rare earth manganites[formula] and a strong coupling of the dielectric response with the rare earth magnetic moment was also reported in these compounds.[formula] The softness of the lattice (as expressed by the sharp increase of εa(T)) is therefore an indication of the softening of the magnetic order as T approaches TSR resulting in the Fe-spin reorientation triggered by the Gd moments and the abrupt decrease of εa. Thermal hysteresis was observed in ε(T) above TSR at zero magnetic field. The hysteretic behavior of εa(T) extends over several degrees just above TSR. Upon cooling in zero field the dielectric constant below TN increases continuously for T →   TSR and drops rapidly right below TSR. However, upon heating, after the sharp increase at TSR there appears a distinct maximum of εa at TM about 0.7 K higher in temperature (Fig. 2). This second anomaly at TM needs to be explored in more detail.

The external magnetic field, H, shows an interesting effect on both dielectric anomalies (TSR and TM). If H is aligned with the c-axis the spin reorientation transition is suppressed and TSR quickly decreases with Hc in accordance with recent magnetic data.[formula] However, TM is barely affected by Hc and the separation of both anomalies increases in magnetic fields as shown in Fig. 2. In contrast, for magnetic fields parallel to a, TSR remains constant but TM shifts to higher temperature (Fig. 3). At the same time the enhancement of εa(T) is largely reduced and disappears for fields exceeding 7 kOe. This qualitative behavior of the dielectric constant in magnetic fields is closely correlated with the magnetic properties of the coupled system of the Fe spins and the Gd moments. It is interesting to note that recent measurements of the magnetic field-induced electric polarization, P, of GdFe3(BO3)4 have shown a sudden increase of P in crossing TSR with increasing field.[formula] This may indicate the existence of a field-induced ferroelectric phase (FIP) and it was proposed that higher order magneto-electric couplings are responsible for the observed phenomena. From our dielectric measurements we can uniquely identify the boundaries of this new phase by the sudden drop of εa(T) at TSR and the distinct maximum of εa(T) at the high temperature end (TM). Therefore, the phase diagram of GdFe3(BO3)4 includes three distinct phases (AFM2, AFM1, and FIP) below the AFM ordering temperature, TN, of the iron system.

The results of magnetization measurements with fields oriented parallel to a and c are summarized in Fig. 4. Surprisingly, the a- and c-axis DC susceptibilities are equal above TN within the experimental resolution, i.e. GdFe3(BO3)4 is magnetically isotropic at high temperatures although there is evidence for easy plane anisotropy of the Fe spins and easy axis anisotropy of the Gd spins.[formula] The anisotropies of both magnetic ions are obviously correlated resulting in a complete isotropic balancing just like some rare-earth metal ferrite-garnets and orthoferrites.[formula] The high temperature Curie-Weiss extrapolation yields a Curie-Weiss temperature of ΘCW =  - 34 K and an effective magnetic moment μeff = 12.2 μB in good agreement with other reports[formula] and the theoretically expected value of μeff = 12.96 μB (Gd3 +, S=7/2 and Fe3 +, S=5/2). Deviations from the Curie-Weiss behavior due to short range AFM correlations are detected below 100 K.

Below TN the magnetic response becomes anisotropic and depends on the direction of the probing field. For H [formula] c the DC susceptibility, χc(T), does not exhibit any anomaly at TN and it is independent of the magnetic field (up to 10 kOe) between TN and TSR. χc decreases suddenly at TSR as a result of the spin reorientation aligning the Fe-spins with the c-axis (Fig. 4). The major effect of Hc is the shift of TSR to lower T and eventually the suppression of the spin reorientation for fields above 8 kOe. It is obvious that the magnetic response strongly depends on the angle between the external field and the Fe spins. This is justifiable since it is energetically unfavorable to keep the Fe spins aligned with the external magnetic field. This qualitative behavior is reflected in the field dependence of the dielectric constant (Fig. 2). εa(T) increases below TN and exhibits a distinct maximum at TM  ≈  10 K. The sharp drop of εa(T) at lower temperature coincides with TSR(H) as determined magnetically. εa(T) is only weakly dependent on the field Hc between TN and TM as is the magnetic susceptibility, χc. Whereas the value of TM is not affected by the field oriented along the c-axis TSR(H) decreases rapidly reaching zero at about 8 kOe and separating the two dielectric anomalies in the magnetic field. The peak of εa(T) indicating the phase boundary between the AFM2 phase and the FIP phase exists well above 8 kOe, the critical field that suppresses the AFM1 phase. Details of the phase diagram will be discussed later.

The magnetic response to an in-plane magnetic field, Ha, is completely different. At low magnetic fields the susceptibility χa levels off below TN and is clearly lower than χc (Fig. 4). This can be attributed to the AFM order of the Fe spins below TN reducing the susceptibility for H [formula] a. Close to TSR, however, χa increases again and its temperature dependence below TSR appears to be a continuation of the c-axis susceptibility, χc (discussed above). This behavior agrees well with the observation that the magnetic susceptibility is little affected by the AFM order if the field is perpendicular to the Fe spins. At TSR the Fe spins rotate towards the c-axis and align themselves with the magnetic field. χa(H) rapidly increases with H in the temperature range TSR  <  T<  TN and it approaches the values of χc above 7 kOe. TSR is independent of Ha, as is also reflected in the dielectric data of Fig. 3 (the sharp drop of εa(T) marks the spin reorientation transition). εa(T) between TSR and TN, however, is strongly affected by Ha and its enhancement below TN is reduced by the magnetic field. Thereby the maximum of εa(T) is shifted to higher temperatures (Fig. 3) reaching the Neel temperature at a relatively low field of 4 to 5 kOe. This limits the AFM2 phase and extends the temperature range of the FIP phase to TN=36 K.

The dielectric anomalies observed in GdFe3(BO3)4 at the magnetic transitions reveal an interesting correlation between the different magnetic subsystems (Fe and Gd) and the spin-lattice coupling leading to the modifications of ε(T). To arrive at a deeper understanding the magnetic correlations have to be considered in more detail. The phase diagram and the magnetic order of GdFe3(BO3)4 was recently investigated by AFM resonance experiments and it was suggested that the Fe spins at high temperatures are aligned in the a-b plane (easy plane anisotropy) whereas the Gd moment experience a strong easy axis anisotropy orienting them along the c-axis.[formula] The AFM order of the iron moments below TN couples to the gadolinium moments resulting in an AFM alignment of the Gd spins ("magnetic polarization"). With decreasing temperature the Fe-Gd coupling grows stronger and eventually triggers the reorientation of the Fe spins resulting in a transition from the non-collinear (TSR  <  T<  TN) to a collinear (T<  TSR) magnetic order of both subsystems along the c-axis. This phenomenon, related to the strong single ion anisotropy of rare earth ions, is not uncommon and it was observed in a number of different compounds involving rare earth ions and d-elements.[formula] Depending on the strength of the anisotropy factors the coupling between the f-moments and d-spins results in the rotation of the d-spins towards the f-moments (such as in R2CuO4, R=Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu)[formula] or vice versa (e.g. in orthorhombic HoMnO3).[formula] In rare cases the f-d exchange can result in an in-plane rotation of the d-spins as observed in hexagonal HoMnO3.[formula] Dielectric anomalies associated with spin reorientation transitions have been observed in several manganites[formula] and the significance of the spin-lattice coupling and magnetoelastic effects have been shown.[formula] The coupling between the f- and d-spins forming a 90 degree angle can be mediated by the antisymmetric Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (that is proportional to the vector product of f- and d-moments and gives rise to weak ferromagnetism) or by a pseudodipolar interaction arising from the anisotropy of the f-d exchange.[formula] In any case, the exchange interaction maximizes if the two moments are perpendicular to each other.

The Fe spin reorientation observed in GdFe3(BO3)4 at TSR is triggered by this f-d exchange mechanism. We propose that the observed enhancement of the dielectric constant below TN (Figs. 1 to 3) is closely related to the indirect f-d exchange coupling and the magnetic polarization of the Gd moments. The increase of εa(T) as T approaches TSR at H=0 reflects the increased coupling strength and AFM Gd sublattice polarization. The spin-phonon coupling causes the lattice to soften as the magnetic order becomes unstable for T →   TSR. The combined effects on εa saturate at TSR(H=0) and it disappears abruptly with the spin reorientation of the iron at lower T resulting in the sudden decrease of the dielectric constant. With the magnetic field applied along the c-axis TSR is lowered but the polarizing effect on the Gd moments and the enhancement of εa(T) still reaches its maximum at 9 K explaining the peak of εa remaining H independent at TM  ≈  9 K. With the magnetic field applied along the a-axis the Gd moments are tilted away from the c-axis and the in-plane AFM order of the Fe-spins is gradually reduced, as can be concluded from the field effect on the susceptibility, χa (Fig. 4). Both effects reduce the f-d exchange coupling and the magnetic polarization of the Gd-spins and its effect on the lattice is reduced. The saturation of the lattice softness happens at higher temperature in the in-plane magnetic field, the maximum of εa(T) is suppressed, and TM increases with H (Fig. 3). Although this discussion is qualitative it does explain the two anomalies observed in the temperature dependence of the dielectric constant and their opposite dependence on the magnetic fields parallel or perpendicular to the c-axis. The softening of the lattice at TM eventually results in a ferroelectric displacement as observed in recent polarization measurements[formula] that indicate the existence of a sizable field-induced polarization between TSR and TM for both orientations (c-axis and in-plane) of the magnetic field. The corresponding magnetostriction data provide the experimental prove for the lattice anomalies at the phase boundaries of the FIP phase, TSR and TM.

The thermodynamic signature of the magnetic phase transitions at TN and TSR is given by sharp peaks of the zero-field heat capacity[formula] at the phase transitions. In external magnetic fields, H [formula] c, the heat capacity peak at TSR shifts to lower T , in accordance with the magnetic and dielectric data discussed above. Fig. 5 shows the heat capacity close to TSR at different values of Hc. All peaks are relatively sharp and symmetrical indicative of a first order phase transition. The heat capacity peak does not shift with H [formula] a which is consistent with our dielectric and magnetic data. From the structural point of view the exchange interaction between gadolinium ions should be weak since they are interconnected by BO3 triangles that are 2.4 Å apart. Thus TM is not observed in the heat capacity or magnetization data but only in dielectric data.

The magnetic phase diagram of GdFe3(BO3)4 at lower temperatures derived from the heat capacity, magnetization and dielectric measurements is shown in Fig. 6 for both orientations of the magnetic field. TSR is not affected by Ha, however, it decreases quadratically with Hc, in agreement with the results of recent resonance[formula] and magnetoelectric experiments.[formula] The field dependence of TM is also shown in Fig. 6 by dashed lines. TM merges with TN for Ha  ≈   5 kOe in good agreement with the anomalies detected in polarization and magnetostriction measurements. However, for H [formula] c, TM(H) is almost constant and extends to far higher fields than TSR. TSR and TM form the phase boundaries of the FIP phase where magnetic field-induced polarization was observed.[formula] It is interesting to note that the heat capacity does not show any anomaly at TM as it does at TSR. The transition across TM is obviously not accompanied by anomalies such as a sizable change of volume etc. This indicates a more subtle change in the correlated magnetic systems of Gd and Fe spins coupled to the lattice that results in the distinct peak of the dielectric constant.

Given the sharp nature of the heat capacity peak anomaly at TSR as well as its sudden drop in magnetization and dielectric constant, a first order phase transition is presumed to occur. To further verify the validity of the first order nature at TSR we make use of the magnetic analog of the Clausius-Clapeyron equation,

-  ΔS(B)/ΔM(B) = dB/dTSR(B)

where ΔS is the change in entropy, ΔM is the change in magnetization and dB/dTSR is the inverse slope of TSR(B) with respect to the internal magnetic field B. The set of values for ΔS are obtained from integrating the area underneath the peak anomaly of Cp/T at different fields (Fig. 5). The set of values for ΔM is obtained from the change of the magnetization at TSR (Fig. 4). dB/dTSR is extracted from the phase diagram of Fig. 6 and B=μ0(H+M). For the case of H [formula] c, equation (1) is well fulfilled as shown in Fig. 7. This proves the first order nature of the spin reorientation transition.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a strong correlation between the magnetic order and the dielectric properties of GdFe3(BO3)4. Below the AFM ordering temperature of the Fe-spins, TN, εa(T) increases and reaches a maximum at the spin reorientation transition temperature, TSR, in zero magnetic field. We interpret the apparent lattice softness as a consequence of the indirect exchange coupling between the Gd- and Fe-spins. For non-zero magnetic fields the εa(T)-maximum (at TM) and the spin reorientation transition are separated and appear at different temperatures. The spin reorientation transition is proven to be a first order phase transition through the magnetic analogue of the Clausius-Clapeyron equation.