=1

Coulomb-oscillator explanation of striped STM images of superconductive copper oxides

Ca2 - xNaxCuO2Cl2 and Bi2Sr2Ca1 - xDyxCu2O8 + δ, like many other copper oxide compounds, become superconductive only when doped, with onset in the range x  ≈  0.05  -  0.10. Asymmetric scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) of the crystals in the superconducting state has revealed a unidirectional electron pattern on the atomic scale.[\cite=1] Various interpretations for this pattern have been proposed.[\cite=1] [\cite=2] [\cite=3] [\cite=4] [\cite=5] Here it is argued that the pattern is a manifestation of superconductive Coulomb oscillators.

The Coulomb-oscillator model of superconductivity[\cite=6] attributes non-resistive electron current exclusively to the motion of the atoms' outer s electrons through the nuclei of neighbor atoms (axial Coulomb oscillation). Superconductivity is destroyed if the electrons' accompanying lateral oscillation, perpendicular to the internuclear line, extends between neighbor atoms. The third tenet of the Coulomb-oscillator model of superconductivity is the squeeze effect, whereby a compression of the atoms that provide the relevant outer s electrons causes a reduction of lateral oscillation width. The difference Δy between the lateral oscillation width, B0B, and the lateral confinement limit, [formula], is a proportional measure for the critical temperature of superconductivity, [formula].

Experimentally, the imaging method used in Ref. 1 is based on tunneling asymmetry, employing the ratio of STM tip-sample current under negative and positive bias. It provides an expression for the imbalance of electron extraction (negative bias) and electron injection (positive bias). For the samples of Ca2 - xNaxCuO2Cl2 and Bi2Sr2Ca1 - xDyxCu2O8 + δ it was found that electron extraction is strongly favored over electron injection. The degree of imbalance is imaged by darkness coding.

The two compounds investigated in Ref. 1 have distinctly different crystal structure (see Figs. 2ab of Ref. 1) except for a common CuO2 plane, depicted here in Fig. 1. It has long been believed that superconductivity occurs in that plane. In undoped Ca2CuO2Cl2, the CuO2 plane is sandwiched by layers of Ca2 + ions, residing above and beneath the centers of the Cu-O-Cu squares. Neither a free Cu2 + ion, nor an O2 - ion in an alkaline-earth oxide--free O2 - ions are unstable--possesses an outer s electron as required by the Coulomb-oscillator model of superconductivity. However, in the copper oxides of high-Tc superconductivity the strong interionic Coulomb forces exert a compression of the conducting CuO2 layer as a whole as well as of the O2 - ions within that layer by their neighbor Cu2 + ions (or in some cases Cu3 + ions). In reaction, the crystal reduces short-range repulsion between the Cu2 + and O2 - ions by an electron reconfiguration in O2 - from 2p6 to 2p1ap1bp2c3s2, that is, by reducing the occupancy of the 2pa and 2pb orbitals that are aligned along the O-Cu axes in favor of excited, isotropic 3s orbitals. It is those 3s electrons of extremely squeezed O2 - ions that form the Coulomb oscillators in the oxide superconductors. In the CuO2 planes of the compounds under consideration, Ca2 - xNaxCuO2Cl2 and Bi2Sr2Ca1 - xDyxCu2O8 + δ, the 3s electrons participate in Coulomb oscillations both between nearest-neighbor O2 - ions (diagonally to the crystal's a and b axes) and between next-nearest O2 - neighbors (parallel to the a or b axis). The accompanying lateral oscillations of the 3s electrons between nearest O2 - neighbors always overswing, not only in the undoped crystal but also in the doped compound, treated below. Diffusing throughout the CuO2 layer, those 3s electrons are ruled out by the Coulomb-oscillator model of superconductivity from being superconductive. As will become clear shortly, that mode of 3s electrons is lost to asymmetric STM imaging, too.

The lateral oscillations of the 3s electrons between next-nearest O2 - neighbors also (but barely) overswing in the undoped crystal.[\cite=7] However, in the doped crystal the extra squeeze of O2 - ions by displaced Cu2 + neighbors sufficiently reduces the width of lateral oscillation that accompanies 3s Coulomb oscillation between those next-nearest O2 - neighbors. Such ion displacements are indicated by arrows in the present Fig. 1 for the CuO2 plane of Ca2 - xNaxCuO2Cl2, x  =  0.125.[\cite=8] The displacement-induced, extra squeeze of the O2 - ions accounts for the emergence of superconductivity at a doping ratio x  ≈  0.05  -  0.10 and for a rise of critical temperature Tc with increased doping up to x  ≈  0.15. Moreover, those 3s electrons are amenable to asymmetric STM imaging.

In the case of doped Ca2 - xNaxCuO2Cl2 with x  =  0.125  =  1 / 8, a Na+ ion substitutes every 16th Ca2 + ion of an undoped crystal. The accompanying reduction of valence electrons can be ragarded as holes, e + , among the 3s electrons from excited O2 - ions, participating in their activities in the same proportion as the doping ratio x. Minimal binding energy of the crystal is achieved when the doped Na+ ions in the sandwiching layers coordinate their positions to form vertical Na+ pairs (parallel to the crystal's c axis). For x  =  0.125, each vertical Na+ pair replaces every 16th vertical Ca2 + pair. Expressed in terms of the crystal's lattice constant (Cu-O-Cu distance) a0  =  3.85 Å, this imposes on the CuO2 plane a square superstructure of 4a0  ×  4a0 domains. The square frame in the present Fig. 1 delimits such a domain. The crosses at the sides of the frame each mark the position of a vertical Na+ pair residing in the planes above and beneath. Experimentally, such square domains of 4a0  ×  4a0 extension are discernible in the STM images in Fig. 3 of Ref. 1.

A trend well known from lattice defects in ionic crystals, nearby O2 - ions are displaced away from the vertical pairs of substitutional Na+ ions. Somewhat counterintuitive with regard to space availability in terms of ionic radii--r(Ca2 +)  =  0.99 Å, r(Na+)  =  0.95 Å--the reason is that the accumulate long-range Coulomb forces dominate over interionic short-range repulsion. For a simplified explanation, one can think that the outward displacement of neighboring O2 - ions results from their lesser electrostatic attraction to Na+ than to Ca2 +. Likewise the inward displacement of nearby Cu2 + ions is caused by their lesser electrostatic repulsion from Na+ than from Ca2 +. There are two equilibrium configurations of displaced O2 - ions: The configuration with fourfold symmetry, dominated by equal outward displacements of the four O2 - ions that are nearest neighbors to a Na+ pair (cross mark in the present Fig. 1), is unstable. Any slight disturbance causes a transition to the stable equilibrium configuration of twofold (mirror) symmetry and presumably lower energy. It is dominated by unequal displacements of the four closest O2 - ions away from the Na+ pair--large outward displacements of two opposite closest O2 - neighbors (white arrows up and down in Fig. 1) and small outward displacements of the other two closest O2 - neighbors (to the left and right in Fig. 1).

Before turning to the question in which way the extra squeeze of O2 - ions from those displacements affects lateral and axial oscillation of 3s electrons, we need to consider the energy situation. The spatial confinement of the squeezed O2 - ions gives rise to an increase of their electron energy (2p  →  3s). Those 3s electrons either diffuse in the CuO2 plane or, if subject to extra squeeze from neighbor-ion displacement, perform laterally confined Coulomb oscillations (squeeze effect[\cite=6]) with extra increased energy. Accordingly it is easier to extract a 3s electron from an extra squeezed region in the sample to an STM tip under negative bias than to inject an external electron under positive bias--a simple explanation for the observed tunneling anisotropy. The dark regions in the STM images in Figs. 3, 4 and 6 of Ref. 1 can therefore be identified as laterally confined Coulomb oscillations of 3s electrons of extra squeezed O2 - ions, swinging through their home nucleus, through their neighbor nucleus, and axially across the interionic region.

More needs to be learned about the exact mechanism of the squeeze effect in an atomic layer, particularly its dependence on atomic (ionic) displacement. But three features stand out for the O2 - ions in columns 4, 3 and 2 (and symmetrically 4', 3' and 2') in the present Fig. 1. First, the O2 - ions of column 4 are much squeezed by their hard Cu2 + neighbors in columns 3 and 3".[\cite=9] This causes a laterally confined Coulomb oscillation of 3s electrons along column 4, depicted in Fig. 1 by straight-line hatching. Second, the additional squeeze of displaced O2 - ions in column 2, experienced mutually with the soft nearest-neighbor O2 - ions of column 1 (participating squeeze effect[\cite=6]), seems to dominate over their slight squeeze reduction from the tangentially displaced Cu2 + neighbors. Accordingly the combined effect provides some extra squeeze (beyond that in the undoped situation, illustrated near the top or bottom of the frame in the figure) that causes laterally confined Coulomb oscillations of 3s electrons through the O2 - nuclei in columns 2 and 2' and through the intervening region (across column 1). This is depicted again in Fig. 1 by straight-line hatching. Third, the opposite scenario holds for the O2 - ions of column 3. Here the squeeze reduction from tangentially more displaced Cu2 + neighbors apparently dominates over additional squeeze mutually incurred with nearest-neighbor O2 - ions between columns 2 and 3. The combined effect thus falls short of extra squeeze of the O2 - ions in column 3. Their 3s electrons then overswing laterally (not shown in Fig. 1) and diffuse in the CuO2 plane, like other 3s electrons from O2 - ions without extra squeeze, as discussed above. Graphically, the white squarish areas between columns 2 and 3 imply the corresponding lack of confined Coulomb oscillations. Also, the energy of those less confined 3s electrons is not extra elevated, preventing anisotropic tunnelling and thus their imaging by STM.[\cite=10]

Now compare the present Fig. 1 with Fig. 4be of Ref. 1: The ion columns 4 and 4' show unidirectional electron density distribution (from axial Coulomb oscillation in the b direction) that furnish the "sidepieces" of the ladders visible in the STM pattern. The sidepieces span along the 4a0  ×  4a0 domain (here, parallel to the b axis). Their extension along successive domains (Fig. 4ad) provides pathways for superconductivity throughout the CuO2 plane of the compound sample. According to the Coulomb-oscillator model of superconductivity such pathways must be monatomic in width. Figures 3, 4 and 6 of Ref. 1 confirm that this is the case: No lateral leakage occurs along close parallel pathways which would spoil superconductivity by electron diffusion. The O2 - ions along the columns 2 and 2', on the other hand, show isolated, diatomic Coulomb oscillators in the sideways a-direction through those O2 - nuclei and across the intervening region. They can be recognized as the "rungs" of the ladders in the STM pattern. The rungs don't contribute to superconductivity due to their lack of connectivity.

The qualitative agreement of the present Fig. 1 with Fig. 4be of Ref. 1 lends support to the validity of the Coulomb-oscillator model of superconductivity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I thank Duane Siemens for stimulating discussions and Preston Jones for help with LaTeX.

FIG. 1. CuO2 plane of Ca2 - xNaxCuO2Cl2, x  =  0.125, with 4a0  ×  4a0 domain (delimited by the frame). The crosses halfway up the sides of the frame each mark the position of a doped Na+ ion pair residing in the plane above and beneath. Ions are shown by their hard-sphere size. Arrows indicate prominent ion displacements. Dashed circles show positions in the undoped crystal for some ions. Straight-line hatching indicates Coulomb oscillation of 3s electrons through oxygen nuclei and, laterally confined, across the interionic region.