Anomalous Cooper pair interference on Bi2Te3 surface

Topological insulators (TIs) [\cite=123] are a class of insulators with topologically protected conducting surface due to strong SOC. The SOC interlocks the momentum and spin degrees of freedom of the electrons in the surface states, so that the motion of the electrons there appears to be helical, acquiring a Berry phase. The helical surface states survive in the presence of a conducting bulk, as revealed by both angular resolved photon emission spectroscopy [\cite=XJZhou_ARPES_ZXshen] and electron transport measurements [\cite=nethelands_ZhangCi].

When the helical electrons pair up via, e.g., superconducting proximity effect, Fu and Kane proposed that they may behave like a spinless px + ipy-wave superconductor [\cite=Fu_liang]. Figure 1a illustrates how the pair correlation is delivered from an s-wave superconductor (colored in dark blue) to the surface and the bulk of a three-dimensional (3D) TI candidate (i.e., with bulk states) via proximity effect. While the induced superconductivity in TI in the vicinity of the s-wave superconductor keeps more or less conventional s-wave-like (colored in light blue in Fig. 1a), at a farther distance on the TI surface, however, only those Cooper pairs formed of helical electrons survive (colored in orange in Fig. 1a).

In general, the wavefunction of a Cooper pair should include the information of the external mass-center orbital part, the internal relative orbital part and the spin part of two paired electrons. This keeps to be true in the presence of SOC. Inherited from each helical electron who encounters a Berry phase of π in the circulation mode along a mesoscopic ring [\cite=QuPRL], winding the mass center of a Cooper pair along the ring rotates the two spins of paired helical electrons in the same angular direction, doubling the total Berry phase accumulated regardless that they are of singlet pairing (further explanations can be found in the supplementary material). A Berry phase of 2π over a 360[formula]-turn on a 2D surface gives rise the px + ipy-wave-like character to the transport properties of the Cooper pairs, regardless that both the total spin angular momentum and the relative orbital angular momentum are zero.

To determine the pairing symmetry of the induced superconductivity in TIs, one needs to perform phase-sensitive experiments similar to those determined the d-wave pairing symmetry in cuprates [\cite=Harlingen_CCTsuei]. Experimentally, superconducting proximity effect has been observed between conventional s-wave superconductors such as Al, Nb, Sn, Pb and 3D TIs such as Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3. However, the Fraunhofer diffraction patterns of single Josephson junctions and the interference patterns of superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) were mostly s-wave like, i.e., the critical supercurrents maximizes at zero magnetic flux [\cite=QuFM] [\cite=Goldhaber-Gordon] [\cite=Brinkman] [\cite=yangfan1]. One exception was observed on a large-area SQUID where a tilted interference pattern was caused by the magnetic flux generated by the bias current [\cite=Brinkman_APL].

The absence of px + ipy-like signature in above mentioned experiments is actually expected, since the modes of Cooper pairs pass through the induced superconducting regions (which serve as the junctions) straightly, picking up no Berry phase. In order to probe the Berry phase, one needs to form an interference loop incorporating curved segments of px + ipy-like superconductors (Fig. 1 b [\cite=XLQi] and c). The use of discrete or granular s-wave superconductors (Fig. 1 d and e) makes it possible to bridge the interference loop on one hand, and to allow the phase of the Cooper pair to vary/accumulate in the px + ipy-like regions along the loop on the other hand.

We have fabricated Pb-grain SQUIDs on the surface of Bi2Te3 flakes (i.e., the design in Fig. 1e) in several different Pb coverage ratios, and studied the interference of Cooper pairs via electron transport measurements down to 30 mK in a dilution refrigerator. We have also explored the multi-segment design shown in Fig. 1d. The results can be found in the supplementary material.

Figure 2a shows the scanning electron microscope image of a Pb-grain SQUID. Between the two bulky Pb electrodes there is a ring composed of Pb grains of 10-50 nm in diameter and 10-20 nm in height. These grains were formed naturally when Pb was sputtered onto the Bi2Te3 surface. Figures 2b and 2c show the differential resistance of the device measured at 30 mK. Two interference patterns can be recognized. One represents a zero-resistance state (dV / dI  ≤  0.2Ω, marked in red), hereafter called pattern A. The other inhabits on a low but finite-resistance state, with a whitish-blue color, hereafter referred to as pattern B. The periods of the patterns, ΔBA = 1.0  ±  0.1 G for pattern A (best seen in Fig. 3h) and ΔBB = 1.15  ±  0.1 G for pattern B, correspond to two slightly different areas of SA = 21  ±  2μm2 and SB = 18.1  ±  1.5μm2, respectively, if estimated using [formula], where φ0 is the flux quanta. The oscillations in pattern B are relatively regular, with a period which is in good agreement with the effective area of the ring [\cite=Josephson]: S = πDinDout / 4  ≈  18.8μm2, where Din = 4μm and Dout = 6μm are the inner and outer diameters of the ring respectively.

The Pb coverage ratio of the device shown in Fig. 2 is 71±  2%. By controlling the deposition time, devices with different Pb coverage ratios were also obtained and studied. It appears that the devices with higher Pb coverage ratios (e.g., the ones with continuous Pb films [\cite=QuFM] or with a Pb network, see Fig. S2 of the supplementary material) show only pattern A, whereas the devices with Pb grains of lower coverage ratios mostly often show only pattern B. The results are summarized in Table S1 of the supplementary material.

Pattern A should arise from a conventional 0-loop, since its highest peak is located at zero magnetic field in both positive and negative bias current directions. On the contrary, pattern B has the following anomalous features. (i) There is a phase shift between the positive and negative current halves. (ii) It inhabits on a finite resistance state. (iii) It appears to be more robust than pattern A, i.e, the oscillations are more uniform, with a wider envelop against magnetic field and survivable to higher temperatures. Also, as we will show later, pattern B survives in larger parallel magnetic fields. Adding to the robustness, pattern B was observed on all the seven working Pb-grain devices out of seven that were investigated, whereas pattern A was observed to coexist only in two of the seven.

Based on the fact that the surface electrons and the bulk electrons manifest distinctively in their Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations [\cite=nethelands_ZhangCi], we speculate that the induced superconducting states at the surface and in the bulk, as well as the interplay between them, give rise to the two distinctive interference patterns. In order to confirm the surface and bulk contributions to the two observed patterns, we applied a parallel magnetic field trying to suppress the superconductivity in the bulk of Bi2Te3 flake.

Figures 3a to 3e show the evolution of the patterns in several parallel magnetic fields [formula]. While pattern A is suppressed at [formula] G, pattern B still survives when [formula] G. The field dependencies of their oscillation amplitudes are summarized in Fig. 3f. In Figs. 4b to 4f we further show the data observed on another device, whose pattern B survives in a parallel magnetic field of a few thousands Gauss at which the induced bulk superconductivity in TI should have been suppressed completely. Figure 3g is a cartoon illustrating that the superconductivity in the bulk (colored in light blue) is easier to be suppressed than that in the surface shell (colored in orange) in a parallel magnetic field, for the reason explained below.

Because less diamagnetic energy is needed in field penetration, the effective critical field of a thin superconducting plate in parallel magnetic fields can be greatly enhanced [\cite=Tinkham]: [formula], where Bc and λL are the critical field and the London penetration depth of the material in its bulk form, respectively, and d is the thickness of the thin plate. For the induced superconducting surface and bulk in Bi2Te3, therefore, the ratio between their effective critical fields is B*c,surf / B*c,bulk≃dbulk / dsurf if neglecting any helicity-related difference. It roughly agrees with the observations in this experiment, i.e., B*c,surf being several thousands Gauss, B*c,bulk≃100 G, dbulk≃100 nm, and dsurf being the thickness of the surface state, which is a few nanometers [\cite=surface_thickness_meas]. We thus believe that pattern B is contributed by an interference loop incorporating the superconducting surface, when the superconducting bulk beneath the Pb islands subsides and disconnects from each other.

In the following, we will discuss whether the observed shift of pattern B reflects an intrinsic character of the superconducting surface, or rather caused by inhomogeneity and the random formation of multiple (≥  3) junctions unevenly distributed on the ring (i.e., mimic a Josephson junction ratchet [\cite=Ratchet]).

The fact that pattern B is more robust than pattern A indicates that the induced superconducting surface is much easier to form an interference loop than the induced superconducting bulk, though their superconductivity stem from the same Pb grains. It indicates that the Cooper pairs have a longer coherence length on the surface than in the bulk, in agreement with the results of existing experiments [\cite=Brinkman]. Our previous studies also show that the superconductivity spreads from Pb to a distance of several micrometers into Bi2Te3 [\cite=QuFM] [\cite=yangfan1], a length which is long enough to bridge the Pb grains in this experiment to form a continuous superconducting loop. Therefore, for those Pb-grain devices whose bulk has already formed a superconducting loop and demonstrated an unshifted interference pattern, it is reasonable to believe that their surface has formed an even more uniform superconducting loop.

On the contrary, if pattern B had not been caused by well-defined junctions but the multiple junctions formed of inhomogeneity origin, the peak positions, which depend on the fine balance between the critical supercurrents of different junctions, would have varied a lot with temperature. Even the number of junction would have changed with temperature. This is not true from our data. In Fig. S5 of the supplementary material, we further show the data obtained on a geometrically well-defined symmetric four-segment SQUID (following the design in Fig. 1d). In spite of having a conventional pattern A, the device also exhibited an anomalous pattern B. Based on all these facts, we conclude that pattern B is an intrinsic property of the superconducting surface, not caused by extrinsic mechanisms such as a rachet.

At first glance, pattern B in Fig. 4 and Fig. S5 of the supplementary material appears to be tilted. However, it is not true. A tilted interference pattern usually arises when the applied current exerts a significant amount of magnetic flux to the SQUID loop. For our devices, the flux generated by the applied current of the order Ic = 1μA cannot exceed LIc / 2  ≈  0.0007φ0 (where L  ≈  3 pH is the inductance of the ring with a radius of 2.5 μm), so that current-induced tilting is negligible. Instead of being tilted, all the peaks in pattern B are actually shifted horizontally by a same amount regardless of their height, which can be best seen from the data of the four-segment SQUID shown in the supplementary material (Fig. S6).

A shift in peak position implies that there is an additional phase added to the phase quantization condition of the loop [\cite=Josephson]: φ1  +  φ2 + 2πΦ  /  φ0  ±  δ = 2πN, where φ1 and φ2 are the phase differences across the two weak links on the arms, Φ is the applied magnetic flux, N is an integer, and ±  δ is presumably the Berry phase acquired by the Cooper pairs from the px + ipy-like segments of the loop in the clockwise/counterclockwise (cw/ccw) circulation modes.

In a ring with mixed s-wave and px + ipy-wave-like segments, the acquired Berry phase is in general not necessary π (Fig. 1b), but an arbitrary value depending on the accumulated turning angle of the mode in the px + ipy-wave-like region (See Fig. 1c. More discussions on arbitrary-phase loops and fractional modes can be found in the supplementary material). Adding an arbitrary phase to the phase quantization condition would shift the free energy minimum of the device away from the zero flux point, forming a symmetric quantum double-well for its cw/ccw circulation modes. The device thus undergoes spontaneous symmetry breaking, associated with a chiral edge supercurrent. In the presence of inter-well tunneling, however, the system further becomes a two-level system, so that the time-reversal symmetry is restored. Applying a bias current tilts the double-well potential via a given asymmetric current distribution of the device, changes the population/dwelling time of the quantum state in the two wells as illustrated in Fig. S7 of the supplementary material.

Another unusual feature of pattern B is that it inhabits on a finite resistance state, superimposed on the bulk contribution. A finite resistance state at low temperatures is often caused by phase fluctuations and dissipations, especially in superconductors with reduced dimensions. In Josephson junctions with a critical supercurrent of 1 μA or smaller, like the ones in this experiment, phase diffusion often happens via macroscopic quantum tunneling (MQT) [\cite=Josephson]. According to Fig. 2 d and e, the voltage across the junctions in pattern B region is 1 - 2 μV, which is comparable to the thermal energy of ~  30 mK in the measurements. It indicates that phase diffusion happens probably via thermally-assisted MQT. From the Josephson equation [formula], the phase changing rate is 0.5 - 1 GHz, or the dwelling time of the phase particle in the washboard potential is around 1 - 2 nS, which is long enough to establish Cooper pair interference along the loop. In addition to phase diffusion, Little-Parks mechanism [\cite=Little-Parks] might also be responsible for the finite-resistance state. Further study is needed to clarify this issue.

To conclude, anomalous Cooper pair interference has been observed on SQUIDs whose a substantial portion of interference loop is built on the superconducting surface of Bi2Te3. The results suggest that the Cooper pairs there on the surface have a Berry phase. Mesoscopic hybrid rings constructed in this experiment are likely arbitrary phase loops in general, and would serve as controllable model systems with improved preparation procedures, good for studying exotic physics of topological quantum states such as exploring for Majorana fermions and topological quantum computation.

The method: The Bi2Te3 flakes of ~  100 nm thick were exfoliated from high-quality single crystals grown by Bridgman method, and were then transferred onto Si/SiO2 substrates. Bulk Pb films of ~  200 nm thick and grain-like Pb structure were fabricated onto the flakes via standard e-beam lithography, magnetron sputtering and lift-off techniques. The electron transport measurements were performed at low temperatures down to 30 mK in a dilution refrigerator. The differential resistance of the devices was measured as functions of both dc bias current and applied magnetic fields in both the perpendicular and parallel directions.

Author contributions

L.L. conceived and designed the experiments. F.M.Q. grew the crystals. Y.D. and J.S. fabricated the devices. J.S., Y.D. and Y.P. performed the measurements. Z.J., J.F. and X.N.J. helped on the experiment. G.T.L. and C.L.Y. participated in the discussions. J.S. and L.L. prepared the manuscript.

Additional information

The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence should be addressed to L.L.