Nemesis encounters of nearby Hipparcos stars

Introduction

Thanks to Hipparcos mission quite accurate astrometric data are available for many nearby stars within 25 parsecs from the Sun. Main errors in kinematical calculations for these stars are now coming from uncertainties in their radial velocities. In order to handle this problem, we calculate average minimal distances [formula] between two stars varying radial velocities in the range of ±  0.3 km/s from their catalog values vr (cf. [\cite=G]). More exactly, we calculate the average value of [formula] with respect to radial velocities vr  ±  k / 10, 0  ≤  k  ≤  3, for each considered star. It excludes all unstable cases when encounters are too distant in time etc. Multiple stars with uncertain astrometic data for some massive components are also excluded. Finally, alternative values of radial velocities from CRVAD2 catalog are used in order to confirm our results.

β and γ Virginis

These are two famous bright F-type stars in the constellation Virgo at ≈   10.93 and ≈   11.68 parsecs from the Sun resp. Gamma Virginis is actually a physical binary of twin F0V-stars.

The current distance between β and γ Virginis is about 2.7 parsecs. If radial velocities from Pulkovo and CRVAD2 catalogs are accurate enough these stars should have the closest encounter within 1/10 parsecs from each other. In the table below we express minimal distances in astronomical units.

61 Cygni vs. χ1 Orionis

61 Cygni is 13th nearest star system according to RECONS at about 3.5 parsecs from the Sun. It is a visual binary consisting of two K-type components HIP 104214 and HIP 104217. 61 Cygni A is slightly more massive than its companion. The total proper motion of this system exceeds 5000 mas/yr.

χ1 Orionis = HIP 27913 is a G0V main-sequence star with a faint M-type companion located at ≈   8.66 pc from the Sun. The current distance between 61 Cygni and χ1 Orionis is about 10.2 parsecs.

The average time and the average minimal distance of encounters are calculated separately for two components of 61 Cygni using both Pulkovo and CRVAD2 catalogs of radial velocities. It follows that the barycenter of 61 Cygni AB system should have the closest encounter with χ1 Ori within 20,000 AU from each other.

Other notable encounters

We present here some interesting examples for stars currently located within 25 parsecs of the Sun. They involve some notorious stars like a subgiant η Boötis. AB Doradus is a rotationally variable star belonging to the moving group of the same name.

In the table below we indicate the current distance between stars as well as average times and minimal distances of their close encounters.

Transit of Luyten 726-8 within 1 ly of Epsilon Eridani

Though Luyten 726-8 (=BL/UV Ceti) is not a Hipparcos star we have checked our previous result about its close encounter with Epsilon Eridani (cf. [\cite=P2]).

Radial velocities for BL/UV Ceti are taken from Malaroda+ and GCRV catalogs.

Acknowledgements

I am very grateful to Stepan Orevkov who has written a compact C++ program calculating encounter parameters of Hipparcos stars from their catalog values.

This research has made use of the SIMBAD database, operated at CDS, Strasbourg, France.