Search for Free-Free Absorption Cutoffs from Tori in Three Type 2 Active Galactic Nuclei

Email: reb@dopey.haystack.edu, cjl@dopey.haystack.edy

Introduction

By now the standard dusty molecular torus scenario for unifying Type 1 (broad line) and Type 2 (narrow line) active galactic nuclei via obscuration/orientation effects will be familiar to most readers (otherwise, see Antonucci 1993 for a comprehensive review). The physics of the hypothesized torus was modeled in detail in a series of papers by Krolik and collaborators (Krolik and Begelman 1986, 1988; Krolik and Lepp 1989, hereafter KL). Their general picture is that of a torus composed of small, dusty molecular clouds lying about a parsec from the central engine. They are unusual molecular clouds, according to KL, having electron fractions ~  10- 3 and temperatures ~  103 K.

To date the torus model has not been satisfactorily tested. Barvainis and Antonucci (1994) searched unsuccessfully for CO absorption from a torus against the compact radio nucleus of the Type 2 radio galaxy Cygnus A. The result, while unexpected at the time, was subsequently rationalized within the torus framework by Maloney, Begelman, & Rees (1994).

One testable prediction from torus models is that the torus should free-free absorb radio photons below a certain frequency as a result of the relatively high electron densities - provided, of course, that the central radio source is compact enough to be blocked by the torus. The inner edge of the torus is at a radius of about 1 pc, for a central UV luminosity of 1044 erg s- 1 (scaling as L1 / 2). The height of the torus material goes roughly as h  ≈  0.7r. According to the KL model, the cutoff frequency is about 5 - 10 GHz. However, Neufeld, Maloney, & Conger (1994, hereafter NMC) found a much lower electron fraction in the torus relative to that of KL (10- 5 versus 10- 3), with the discrepancy arising because KL underestimated the destruction rate of the molecular ion H+3. NMC predict instead a warm atomic region lying near the inner edge of the torus, having an electron fraction ~  10- 2 (see also Maloney 1996). Coincidentally, however, the resulting free-free absorption is the same as for KL: the cutoff frequency is predicted to be in the few to 10 GHz range.

In a search for this predicted cutoff, we observed the radio cores of three narrow line radio galaxies at a range of frequencies between 1.6 GHz and 15 GHz, using the NRAO Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA). We report the results below.

Source Selection and Observations

The ideal source for this search would be a Type 2 AGN, i.e., one in which the nucleus (central optical continuum source, broad line region) is obscured by the torus. It would be reasonably strong in the radio regime, and sufficiently compact to have significant flux on VLBI scales. To further select for compactness the radio spectrum would be flat or inverted, indicating a partially self-absorbed synchrotron source.

Mrk 348 (NGC 262; z = 0.014) was chosen as our top-rated object, for its strong, inverted VLBI core source (Neff & de Bruyn 1983), and its nearness (providing good linear resolution). It has a Seyfert 2 optical spectrum in unpolarized light, with clear broad emission lines in polarized (reflected) light, indicating the presence of a hidden Seyfert 1 nucleus (Miller & Goodrich 1990). Additional evidence for the presence of a dusty torus has been offered by Simpson et al (1996). Its host galaxy is an early-type spiral.

Two other sources were selected for observation because of their availability during the observing time allocated for Mrk 348. These are OW637 and 3C99, both of which are narrow-line radio galaxies. OW637 (z = 0.227) has a strong, flat-spectrum core which dominates the radio emission. 3C99 (z  =  0.426) is a lobe-dominated radio galaxy with very asymmetric lobe fluxes, having a VLBI core at 1.6 GHz with peak flux density 60 mJy. The core is steep spectrum, making this source less than ideal for observation of very compact structure likely to be contained within a torus.

The observations were conducted during a 12.5 hour period on April 5/6, 1995, under VLBA project code BB21. The usefulness of the results in this project depended heavily on image fidelity, and an observing strategy was chosen which optimized the (u,v) coverage. We used the frequency agility of the VLBA to switch rapidly between the five observing frequencies: 1630 MHz, 2270 MHz, 4990 MHz, 8420 MHz and 15360 MHz. The observing frequency was switched typically every 2 minutes, and combined with interleaving of target sources in time, all 15 source/frequency combinations received good (u,v) coverage, with no major holes. In addition to the program sources, 3C84 and 1739+522 were observed as fringe-finders.

The data were correlated in Socorro, and were calibrated in the normal manner using the VLBA log data. The data were edited, fringe-fitted and imaged in AIPS with no significant problems, except that 3C99 at 15 GHz was too weak for fringe-fitting and had to be abandoned. The RMS noise levels on the images are generally in the range 0.2-0.5 mJy/beam, except for OW637 for which dynamic range limits of 200-500 result in rms fluctuations at the 3 mJy/beam level. Component flux densities are reported in Table 1. At 8.4 GHz and 15 GHz the fluxes are taken from maps convolved to the same beamsize as the 5 GHz maps, in order to avoid resolution effects and facilitate measurement of spectral indicies.

We obtained additional X-band data on OW637 from the United States Naval Observatory (USNO) Radio Reference Frame Image Database program (courtesy Alan Fey). These observations are of longer duration and higher quality than our own X-band measurements (contour image can be seen in Fey et al 1996). The observing date was 1994 July 8. Four separate observing frequencies within the X-band were used. See Table 1 for details.

Results and Discussion

Low Frequency Cutoffs

The angular resolutions differ by a factor of order 10 from L-band to U-band, limiting the range of component sizes and separations for which reliable 5-point spectra can be derived. Only compact, well-separated components are analyzed below. While high-frequency spectral information at higher resolution exists in our dataset, no dramatic spectral gradients were evident, and no detailed analysis was performed.

3C99 shows double structure in the VLBI core which is resolvable at all frequencies, with a separation of 14 mas. A weak third component is also visible in some of the maps of 3C99. OW637 has four VLBI components (see below). Mrk 348 was resolved into two components only in the highest resolution map (15 GHz), with a component separation of 1 mas. For 3C99 and OW637 we plot radio continuum spectra of all components that could be well-resolved (Figures 2 and 3), while for Mrk 348 the components are not separable at the lower frequencies and we plot only the total flux (Figure 1).

None of the spectra show the sharp low-frequency cutoff expected for free-free absorption. Component B in OW637 rolls over from 5 GHz to 2.3 GHz, but the spectral index of + 1 is not high enough to eliminate other possibilities such as synchrotron self-absorption (it is worth bearing in mind, however, that this represents a lower limit to the spectral index because of the finite sampling of the spectrum). Therefore we have not found any new evidence for the existence of a torus. The possibilities for explaining this result are:

The torus is not present in these objects. Given the growing body of direct evidence for anisotropic obscuration, combined with persuasive arguments on which orientation-related unified schemes are based, it seems probable that something akin to a torus does in fact exist, and we regard this possibility as unlikely.

The torus is there, but its parameters are such that the cutoff occurs below our lowest observing frequency of 1.6 GHz, or above our highest observing frequency of 15 GHz (so that the true core is never seen). It may be worthwhile to investigate possible torus conditions which would give rise to significantly lower (or higher) free electron densities than the models of KL or NMC. If the inner edge of the torus resides for some reason outward of the ~  1 pc inner radius of these models, the free-free optical depth will be lower because of a reduction in radiation pressure (upon which τf - f depends linearly). Maloney (1996) invoked this effect as a possible explanation for the absence of free-free absorption at gigahertz frequencies in Cygnus A (see that paper for expressions relating τf - f and various physical parameters of the torus).

The test is not applicable because the bulk of the radio emission lies outside the torus and therefore cannot be absorbed by it, or the torus orientation is not "side-on". The former could occur if the jet material we observe lies more than a parsec or so from the true central engine. This seems plausible for 3C99, which has no strong self-absorbed component identifiable as a "core", but less so for Mrk 348 and OW637, which do. The "core" component would then have to be a standing shock or similar feature in the flow some distance downstream from the center. Hints of such a phenomenon may have been seen in other sources (Marscher 1997). Orientation may be more of an issue for Mrk 348 and OW637, despite our optical selection for torus obscuration of the inner regions. Both objects have strong, variable (see Neff & De Bruyn 1983 for Mrk 348, and below for OW637) cores, and weak or non-existent lobes. These properties suggest that our line-of-sight may be near the axis of a relativistic jet and therefore, in the unified picture, perpendicular to the plane of the torus. Future experiments, perhaps using phase referencing to enhance sensitivity, might profitably target weak, quiescent cores of lobe-dominated narrow line radio galaxies.

Free-free absorption on small scales has been discussed recently for several radio galaxies. Probably the most convincing case known to us is that of Centaurus A, where Jones et al (1996) found that the spectrum of the milliarcsecond core is probably highly inverted, α  ~   + 4 ([formula]) between 2.3 GHz and 8.4 GHz, with the main uncertainty being a possible misregistration of the images at the two frequencies. Another good case is that of NGC 1275 (3C84), where the northern jet (the counterjet) is resolved, yet has an inverted spectrum (Vermeulen, Readhead, & Backer 1994; Walker, Romney, & Benson 1994; Levinson, Laor, & Vermeulen 1995). The inferred size of the free-free absorbing screen, or torus, is less than a parsec for Cen A, and a few parsecs for NGC 1275. Hydra A and NGC 4261 may also possess components that are free-free absorbed (Taylor 1996; Jones & Wehrle 1997).

Our strategy was to look for the most direct evidence of free-free absorption, that being a spectrum well-sampled over a range of frequencies showing a clear and sharp cutoff toward low frequencies. Such a cutoff was not seen in the three Type 2 AGNs observed. The most probable explanation is that the emission measure ([formula]) through the torus is lower than current models suggest, at least in these objects, though it is possible that our observations failed to probe the torus due to geometrical considerations.

Unusually steep components in OW637

The maps of OW637 show several components, arranged roughly along a line (four components are resolvable at C- and X-bands; see Figure 4). Components A, B, and D (same convention as used by Bartel et al 1984) appear to be unresolved at all frequencies. Component C is extended at C-, X-, and U-bands, making its spectrum difficult to determine (we do not report flux values for component C for this reason). Therefore we only show spectra of components A, B, and D in Figure 3. Component D is relatively flat over the limited frequency range where it is not blended with component C. However, components A and B both have spectra that are unusually steep (i.e., steeply falling toward high frequencies), at least over part of the spectral range. Component D appears to have varied since the measurements of Bartel et al (1984). We find a flux density of 1950  ±  100 mJy at 8.4 GHz, compared with their 850  ±  70 mJy at 8.3 GHz.

Component A appears to be steep throughout the measured range, with the segment between C- and X-bands having spectral index αCX  =   - 2.05  ±  0.14. The steep slope is apparent even within the closely-spaced X-band measurements (see inset to Figure 3). Component B has a spectral peak at 5 GHz and steepens rapidly toward high frequencies, with αXU  =   - 2.22  ±  0.11 between 8.4 and 15.4 GHz. Such steeply falling spectra appear to be quite unusual. Among the 518 total flux density (i.e., large-beam) spectra of extragalactic radio sources assembled by Kühr et al (1981), none have spectra approaching this steepness. However, summing all the components in OW637 will produce a fairly flat spectrum, so it is possible that very steep components like A and B may only be observable with VLBI.

Typical spectral indices for extended structures in extragalactic radio sources are in the range [formula], with the steepest observed index being about - 2 (Kellerman & Owen 1988). For a sample of ultrasteep radio sources compiled by Röttgering et al (1994), the steepest have spectral indices ~   - 1.6. Steep spectra in diffuse sources are generally thought to be due to synchrotron aging of electrons that have drifted far from any source of reacceleration. Spectra of VLBI components typically run from inverted (α  ~   + 1, due to synchrotron self-absorption and component superposition), to moderately steep (α  ~   - 1). We know of no VLBI components previously reported with slopes as steep as - 2. Synchrotron lifetimes for electrons in luminous, compact components like those seen in OW637 can be of order years. However, current thinking holds that VLBI components are the sites of shocks in jets, with attendant continuous reacceleration of particles. It is conceivable that in OW637 a shock has suddenly turned off, allowing the decay of electron energies through synchroton losses. However, this would have to have happened at nearly the same time in components A and B to produce the observed steep spectra in both, and therefore seems unlikely.

A nonrelativistic, adiabatic, strong shock will have a compression factor [formula], and electrons accelerated by the Fermi mechanism in such a shock will have an electron energy power law index - 2.5  <  s  <   - 2 ([formula], with [formula]) (see Begelman, Blandford, & Rees 1984). This produces the canonical range - 0.75  <  α  <   - 0.5 for the radiation spectral index via [formula]. The case of [formula] found for OW637 requires s  =   - 5, and r  =  1.75. We are not aware of any specific acceleration models that predict numbers like these.

Another possibility for producing a steep spectrum is synchrotron emission from a relativistic Maxwellian electron distribution at frequencies well above νT, the characteristic synchrotron frequency for electrons of energy Tmec2. At ν  /  νT  ~  100, the spectrum is steep and slightly curved (convex), with α  ~   - 2 (using equation 6 of Jones & Hardee 1979). This could account for the shape of component A, but not B, which is too sharply peaked to be fit by a relativistic Maxwellian.

Pulsars produce radio spectra that are very steep, (- 1  <  α  <   - 4) via coherent radiation, but quasar radio emission is thought to be incoherent synchrotron and differs observationally from that of pulsars in several ways (e.g., much lower levels of polarization, lower brightness temperatures, normally much flatter spectra). However, owing to its two steep-spectrum components OW637 is an unusual case among quasars and should be looked at more thoroughly. The present observations were set up only for total intensity measurements; we plan to measure the polarization properties and extend the spectral coverage of OW637 in a future experiment.

1.0truecm

FIGURE CAPTIONS