Mass-Models of Five Nearby Dwarf Irregular Galaxies

Introduction

The strongest evidence for dark matter in galaxies comes from extended neutral hydrogen (HI) rotation curves of galaxies, and especially amongst all the galaxy types from dwarf Irregulars (dIrrs) rotation curves. These systems are literally dominated by dark matter, their luminous matter usually bring only a minor dynamical contribution. From their extended HI distribution one can derive rotation curves to large galactocentric radii, probing very far out into the dark halo potential. For these reasons the dark matter halo parameters can be tightly constrained. And by studying extreme low-mass dIrrs one gets a better handle on the dark halo scaling laws, since there are known correlations of the dark halo properties with galaxy types (Kormendy 1987).

The dIrrs of our sample are dwarf members of the two nearest groups of galaxies outside the Local Group, Sculptor at 2.5 Mpc and Centaurus A at 3.5 Mpc. Our Parkes HI survey detected three dozens of dwarf members in these two groups (see Côté et al 1996 for a detailed description). Five objects amongst the most gas-rich ones, with absolute magnitude MB in the range - 15 to - 12.7, were selected for kinematical studies: UGCA 442 (Sculptor Group), ESO381-G20, DDO 161, ESO444-G84, and ESO325-G11 (Centaurus A Group). Some of their optical parameters are listed in Table 1.

HI observations

HI mappings were done with the Australia Telescope (1.5km & 3km arrays) and the Very Large Array (B/C & C/D), providing velocity resolutions of 3.3  km s- 1 and 5.2  km s- 1 respectively, and beam sizes ranging from 13" to 40". The HI distributions extend well beyond the optical galaxies in all cases, out to 2 Holmberg radii on average, which means for our dwarfs radii between 4 and 13 α- 1 (where α- 1 is the optical disk scalelength). Their velocity fields show the clear signature of large-scale rotation. These dwarfs are therefore gravitationally supported by rotation rather than pressure-supported by random motions (since their velocity dispersions are much lower, see below). For lower luminosity systems the maximum rotation velocity (Vmax) decreases so one expects that eventually the random motions dominate in very small galaxies. Here the range of magnitudes of our objects overlap with the Lo et al 1993 Local Group sample which they found to be pressure-supported, although Hoffman et al 1996 recently got higher Vmax for half of these dwarfs from Arecibo mapping. So it seems that down to at least MB =  - 12 the systems are supported by rotation.

Inclined tilted-rings were fitted to the velocity fields to yield the rotation curves, allowing to model the warps which are found to be about 10deg on average (in position angle and inclination), leaving low velocity residuals of the order of 5  km s- 1 . As is expected for such systems the rotation curves are seen to be slowly rising (see Figure 1), however the flat part is reached in all cases, and the Vmax range from 43  km s- 1  to 67  km s- 1 . The velocity dispersions are mostly uniform with an average value of 8  km s- 1, which is similar to giant spirals where σ  ~   10  km s- 1 (Shostak & van der Kruit 1984). So indeed their Vmax is several times higher than their σ so that they are supported mainly by rotation, which allows us to build valid mass-models with their rotation curves, provided the velocities are corrected for asymmetric drift to take this pressure term into account (Skillman 1987).

Mass-Models

Multi-component mass-models have been fitted to the rotation curves (Figure 1), which assume the mass distribution of a galaxy to consist of a stellar disk, a neutral gas disk, and a dark matter halo. The mass-components of the luminous material (stars and gas) are calculated from the surface brightness profile and the HI radial surface density profile, while a nonsingular isothermal sphere is used for the dark matter halo (see Carignan 1985). The mass-to-light ratio of the stellar disk (M / L)lum is a free parameter, it is applied to the luminosity profiles (here obtained in I with the Siding Spring 2.3m telescope) to obtain the stellar mass surface densities. The dark matter halo has two free parameters, its core radius and its velocity dispersion, with its central density given by ρ0  =  9σ2   /   4πGr2c. Of course the more extended is the rotation curve the better one can hope to constrain these parameters. Also combining the HI rotation curves with optical Hα rotation curves in the inner parts, like we have here for UGCA 442 and DDO 161, helps better constraining (M / L)lum.

For each dwarf a 'best-fit' model and a so-called 'maximum-disk' model ((M / L)lum being pushed to its maximal allowed value) were constructed. Figure 1 shows the best-fit models. It is clear that the dark matter is in every case the most massive component, accounting for at least 54% and up to more than 92% of their total mass (out to the last measured point of their rotation curves). They are definitely dark-halo dominated, and in fact even in the rising part of the rotation curve, except for ESO325-G11, the dark halo becomes already the major dynamical contributor and the stellar disk is not self-gravitating. This is also the case for other dwarfs like DDO 154 (Carignan & Freeman 1988), DDO 127 (Kormendy 1996) and DDO 170 (Lake et al 1990) in which the rotation curve is explained by dark matter even near the center. Even the gas component is sometimes more dynamically significant than the stellar disk, like in DDO 161 or UGCA 442 which has two times more mass in HI than in stars. So even if (M / L)lum is the least well constrained parameter in our models, this does not impact very much on the total mass or mass-to-light ratio (M / LB)dyn derived for these objects.

Properties of dark halos

Let us now compare the dark halo parameters of our dwarfs with those of normal spirals, in order to inspect the halo scaling laws. Kormendy (1990) pointed out that the central halo density seems to increase for galaxies of decreasing absolute magnitude. With their study of DDO 154 Carignan & Freeman (1988) suggested that the ratio of dark to luminous matter (Mdark / Mlum) gets larger for galaxies at the low mass end. Our mass-models results confirm that the total mass-to-light ratio scales with luminosity, in the sense of course that lower luminosity galaxies have a higher ratio of dark matter mass to luminous mass than so-called normal galaxies. This is true even when comparing their dark matter and luminous masses at a particular radius, for example at a few times the stellar disk scalelength α- 1 rather than at the last measured point at rmax (otherwise galaxies with more extended HI rotation curves will be advantaged as more of their dark halo is sampled). In Figure 2 Mdark / Mlum at a radius of 7 α- 1 is plotted for a sample of galaxies for which rotation curves extend at least that far (from the compilation of Broeils 1992). The results of our dwarfs maximum-disk models are added (with lower limits in two cases because their rotation curves don't reach 7 α- 1).

It can be argued that comparing these masses at a certain optical radius, like R25 or 7 α- 1 here, is perhaps not the best choice considering that the stellar disk is so unimportant for dwarfs and therefore these values are not representative of the baryonic scalelength for a dwarf. Nevertheless despite this the trend is clearly visible in Figure 2. For normal spirals Mdark / Mlum is not far from ~  1 (which was noticed many years ago by Bahcall & Casertano 1985 for example), but is known to be a function of luminosity (eg. Persic & Salucci 1988, 1990). At lower luminosity this increases very rapidly. The point at the top is DDO 170 (Lake et al 1990); also NGC 5585 (Côté et al 1991) has a high Mdark / Mlum of 6.9, as most low-surface-brightness galaxies seem to have higher fraction of dark matter (see also de Blok, this volume). One also notices that DDO 154 (at MB=-13.8) is not an exceptional galaxy, other dwarfs of the same luminosity range have similar (or even more extreme!) dark matter properties.

Looking now at the dark matter halo parameters, in Figure 3 the central dark halo density is plotted for our dwarfs as well as a sample of 16 galaxies which have been modeled similarly using an isothermal sphere for the dark halo (mainly from the Puche & Carignan 1991 compilation, see Côté 1995). Like Kormendy (1990) we notice an increase in ρ0 for lower luminosity galaxies. But again, like in Figure 2, there is a large dispersion within the dIrrs. This seems to indicate that galaxies with similar optical properties can have dark matter halos with fairly different properties. Athanassoula et al (1987) also suggested that halos of early-type galaxies are more concentrated than those of later types. We also see a a trend that the ratio of the core radius over R25 increases for our dwarfs (but with a large spread here too).

These trends have important implications for galaxy formation scenarios. Indeed the CDM halos from N-body simulations with Ω0 = 1 of Navarro, Frenk & White (1996) are not compatible with observed rotation curves: the CDM halos are substantially more concentrated than what is inferred from observations. Navarro, Eke & Frenk (1996) have proposed that early bursts of star formation could expell a large fraction of the baryonic material in dwarfs therefore significantly altering the central regions. But low-surface-brightness galaxies, which can have quite large scalelengths and be massive objects (de Blok, this volume) are also obsverved to be less concentrated than their simulated halos; since they do not have the shallow potentials of dwarfs it is more difficult to create baryonic outflows to solve their concentration problem. Navarro (this volume) proposes instead that lower concentration halos, compatible with dwarfs and LSBs observed curves, can be produced by low Ω0 flat CDM models, with Ω0 = 0.3 and Λ = 0.7; it should be noticed that the inclusion of a compensating Λ term is mandatory for Ω  <  1 models, since the way current simulations are constructed requires a flat geometry of the background cosmology (Buchert 1995).

Another possible clue about the nature of dark matter comes from the fact that in most spiral galaxies the ratio of the HI surface densities to dark matter surface densities (ΣHI  /  ΣDM) are seen to stay remarkably constant (Bosma 1978), even out to large radii (Carignan et al 1990). This has been used as an argument for a strong coupling between the HI gas and the dark matter, hinting that the dark matter is not dissipationless, therefore has possibly a baryonic nature. One can then model the rotation curves using a scaled-up version of the HI disks (ie: varying the gas mass) rather than a dark matter halo (see van Albada, this volume) and obtain reasonable fits (sometimes even better ones, Broeils 1992). In our dwarfs however this is no longer true: the ratio of HI to dark matter surface densities start dropping appreciably at roughly the Holmberg radius. Figure 4 shows the case of DDO 161 (for which RHO  ~  3 kpc) where this ratio ΣHI  /  ΣDM drops by at least a factor of 10 (similar factors are found for our other 4 dwarfs). Many spirals have HI radial profiles measured out to a larger number of α- 1 than some of our dwarfs (see the whole sample of Figure 3 for example) and do not exhibit this decline in ΣHI  /  ΣDM. So this could imply that not only different galaxies can have different fractions of dark matter but possibly a different mixture of dark matter flavours (different fractions of baryonic and non-baryonic dark matter).

Conclusions

Dwarf irregular galaxies are dark-matter dominated, the dark matter halos of our dwarfs account for 54% up to 92% of their total mass (inside rmax). In most cases the dark halo is the major dynamical contributor already in the rising part of the rotation curve, and sometimes even the HI disk is more massive than the stellar disk.

Our mass-models results show that these lower luminosity galaxies have higher total mass-to-light ratios, and that their dark halos have higher central densities and are less concentrated, confirming the Kormendy (1989) correlations.

Contrary to what is found in normal spirals, the ratio of HI to dark matter surface densities are no longer constant at large galactocentric radii. One can no longer fit scaled-up HI disks instead of dark halos to explain the rotation curves, since at large radii there is no longer a strong coupling between the HI gas and the dark matter.