YOUNG STARS AT LARGE DISTANCES FROM THE GALACTIC PLANE: MECHANISMS OF FORMATION

Introduction

There exists an anomalous group of early-type -hence mostly young- stars located far from the galactic plane, at z-distances ranging from 1 to more than 10 kpc. First studied were the A-type stars (Rodgers et al. 1981; Lance 1988). Such intermediate-age stars have most recently been studied by Preston and Sneden (2000) and are likely to be blue stragglers. More recently, a number of OB stars have been found, also situated at vertical distances of up to several kpc from the plane (Conlon et al. 1989; Conlon et al. 1990; Conlon 1992; Schmidt et al. 1997; Ringwald et al. 1998). The shorter lifetimes of these stars exacerbate the problems of their interpretation in terms of the standard picture of star formation and galactic evolution. The most extreme examples, if they originated in the plane, must have been ejected with velocities surpassing 1000 km/s, which clearly are unrealistically high values.

Different mechanisms have been put forward to explain the existence of these stars, either within the conventional view, or postulating star formation in the galactic halo itself (see for instance Lance 1988; or Tobin 1991, for extensive reviews). These mechanisms range from arguing that they are misidentified evolved or pathological stars, to postulating powerful ejection mechanisms for young, thin disk stars, or to proposing that they were formed in situ, in the galactic halo, from a mixture of gas acquired while the Galaxy captured a small satellite galaxy, or from collisions between cloudlets, or other possibilities.

It has become clear that the anomalous stars are quite a mixed bag themselves, and that, as a group, they undoubtedly contain some misidentified evolved stars, or some Population II stars posing as young B stars. But the youth of quite a number of them seems well established, as shown by accurate determinations of surface gravities and colors, high resolution spectral studies, detailed abundance determinations, rotational velocities, etc. Among the genuinely young OB stars far from the plane, it is also clear that no single mechanism is capable of explaining all cases. Extreme examples, like PG 1002+506, a Be star with z >   10 kpc (Ringwald et al. 1998), PG 009+036, a rapidly rotating normal B star at z >   5 kpc (Schmidt et al. 1996), and others, are likely to remain puzzling for the foreseeable future. Nonetheless, Tobin (1991) concludes that dynamical ejection from small clusters in the plane, as envisaged for runaway stars by Poveda et al. (1967) and further studied by Gies end Bolton (1986), Leonard and Duncan (1988,1990), and others, remains the most likely explanation for many of the young stars at large distances from the plane. Clearly, it is then of importance to determine for which stars this mechanism is the likely explanation

A group of young stars far from the galactic plane

Although there are many more examples of presumably young stars far from the galactic plane scattered in the literature, for the purposes of this work we will focus our attention on the relatively homogeneous group of 32 stars studied by Conlon et al. (1990). The evidence for the youth of these stars comes from detailed, high resolution abundance studies not only of elements of the CNO group, but also of heavier elements. These determinations allow the authors to conclude that their stars are bona fide, normal young B stars, and not evolved, intermediate composition stars, or Population II stars mimicking the spectroscopic characteristics of early type stars.

By means of a rudimentary estimation of the times of flight of these stars, assuming they were dynamically ejected from the plane, Conlon et al. conclude that ejection is indeed the most likely mechanism to explain the majority of them.

Orbital analysis

We have obtained improved estimates of the times of flight by numerically integrating the galactic orbits of these stars. We have updated the proper motions of the Conlon et al. stars using Hipparcos data. Radial velocities were taken, when available, from the Hipparcos Input Catalogue; otherwise, they were calculated from the data given by Conlon et al. We used their values for the distances. We then proceeded to numerically integrate the galactic orbit of each star. The galactic potential model of Allen and Santillan (1993) was used for the integration of the orbits.

For each of the stars, times of flight since they left the galactic plane were obtained from the orbit computations. These times of flight were then compared with the nuclear lifetimes of disk-composition stars using the models of Schaller et al. (1992). The stellar masses determined by Conlon et al. were used. The results of this analysis are summarized in Table 1. Successive columns contain the Hipparcos number of the star, the time elapsed since it left the plane, the mass, the main sequence lifetime, the velocity of ejection from the plane, the estimated error in the computed times of flight, the times of flight if the stars formed at z = 700 pc, and finally, a code tagging the stars that can be explained by the ejection mechanism, or some variants thereof.

Table 1 shows that for 24 out of the 32 stars the times of flight are smaller than the nuclear lifetimes. It is clear, then, that these stars could indeed have been ejected from the plane. They are marked by a 'y' (for yes) in the last column of Table 1. The ejection velocities, also obtained from the orbital analysis, are shown in Column 5. Their values are quite reasonable, and compatible with the ejection model. The errors in the times of flight, shown in Column 6, were estimated by computing two additional orbits for each star, with the initial conditions modified by the observational errors in distances, proper motions and radial velocities. The uncertainties in the times of flight are fairly small, and are largely due to the estimated errors in the distances.

Discussion and conclusions

We have shown that the dynamical ejection mechanism is a plausible alternative to explain the majority of the stars in Table 1. However, for 8 stars the times of flight are larger than the nuclear lifetimes, and these stars do not have time to reach the z-distances at which they are observed. We could pose the question as to whether there are ways to prolong the nuclear lifetimes of massive stars. One obvious possibility is rapid rotation, which will induce mixing. However, models calculated with rotation increase the nuclear lifetimes by at most 20 percent (Meynet and Maeder 2000). So, rotation would solve the problem only for three additional stars. They are marked by an 'r' in the last column of Table 1.

Another possibility we can explore is star formation not on the galactic plane, but a few hundreds of parsecs above or below it. Such a mechanism was proposed by Martos et al. (2000), and is a result of the passage through the disk of a spiral density wave, which can eject sheets of gas to distances of up to 800 pc from the plane. After the spiral density wave passes, the gas will fall back onto the plane; however, in certain cases, Martos et al. showed that conditions are favorable for star formation while the ejected gas is still far from the plane. We can envisage that, as occurs in the plane, star formation will result not in single stars being born, but rather multiples or small clusters, within which the dynamical ejection mechanism could take place. We would then have runaway stars being produced not at z = 0 but at z = 500-800 pc.

Returning to the orbital analysis, we can determine the times of flight not since the star left the plane, but since the star left a region situated 700 pc above or below the plane, where it could have formed according to the Martos et al. scheme. Such times of flight are, of course, shorter than the times of flight from the plane, and could be shorter than the nuclear lifetimes of the problem stars. The stars for which this is the case are marked by an 'f' (for birth far from the plane). There is a total of five stars for which formation away from the plane, as in the Martos et al. scheme, would make the ejection mechanism a plausible alternative.

To sum up our results, the last column of Table 1 shows that taking into account both the increase in the nuclear lifetimes than can result from stellar rotation, and star formation away from the plane, 29 out of the 32 stars can be explained by the dynamical ejection mechanism. This leaves, however, three stars for which another explanation is necessary.