.sty

Geometry and main hypotheses

The schematic view of our toy model can be seen in Fig. 1. We assume a 1D geometry and we suppose the shock to be located in x = 0. This will be insured by imposing that the flow velocity possesses an inflection point in x = 0 that is (noting u(x) the flow velocity): [formula]. We suppose the spatial diffusion coefficient D to be independent of x and of the energy of the particles and we assume the plasma pressure Ptot to be dominated by the pressure Prel of the relativistic leptons population.

Shock disappearance

The shock still exists as long as Eq. (1) (which depends on the pair pressure creation rate [formula] and on the size of the pair creation region Rγγ cf. Fig. 1) is verified. It appears that, for a given value of Rγγ, there exists a limit value [formula] of [formula] above which Eq. (1) has no consistent solutions anymore and the shock disappears.

Variability

As seen before, for pair pressure creation rate larger than [formula] the shock disappears. However, with the corresponding fall down of the acceleration processes, the rate of pair creation, and consequently the pair pressure creation rate, decreases and the shock may appear again, initiating pair processes until a new destruction of the shock. These cycles shock appearance/disappearance could thus be the origin of the high energy variability observed in AGNs (and perhaps in prompt γ-ray bursts where the compactness may be large enough).

Stationary states

If the pair pressure modifies the flow velocity profile, reversely a change of the flow velocity profile can modify the distribution function of the accelerated particles in such a way that the number of particles enable to trigger the pair creation process (i.e. particles with γ  ≥  γth) may change, modifying consequently the pair creation rate. Stationary states are then obtained by solving self-consistently for the particle distribution function n(γ) and the flow velocity profile u(x), linked through the pair pressure creation rate. We have reported on Fig. 2 the contour plots of the spectral index and high energy cut-off of the high energy spectra produced by IC for stationary states characterized by different values of the soft compactness and the upstream flow velocity.