Issues, Concepts, and Challenges in Spintronics

In spite of the great current interest in the basic principles and concepts of spintronics a large number of obstacles need to be overcome before one can manufacture spintronics applications. For example, a basic spintronics transport requirement is to produce and sustain large spin-polarized currents in electronic materials (semiconductors) for long times. This has not yet been accomplished. In fact, it has turned out to be problematic to introduce spin-polarized carriers in any significant amount into semiconductor materials. Similarly, for quantum computation one requires significant and precisely controllable spin entanglement as well as single spin (i. e., a single Bohr magneton) manipulation using local magnetic fields. Currently there is no good idea about how to accomplish this. It is clear that a great deal of basic fundamental physics research will be needed before spintronics applications become a reality.

In this paper we highlight and summarize a few examples of spintronics research with the emphasis on understanding principles and operations with future device potential. We concentrate on the elementary aspects of spintronics which must be understood and developed before any possible applications can be discussed. These aspects are creating, maintaining, manipulating, and measuring spin currents in semiconductors (and related electronic materials), spin entanglement in semiconductor quantum dots in the context of quantum computation, and spin relaxation. The examples are drawn from our own theoretical research on spintronics, and we refer the reader to our existing publications for the details.

Initial measurements of spin lifetimes were conducted in metals like Na or Li by conduction electron spin resonance (CESR) technique [\cite=feher55]. The most important outcome of these experiments concerned the magnitude of T1 (nanoseconds) and its temperature behavior: T1 is constant at low temperatures (below, say, 50 K) and is increasing linearly with increasing temperature at elevated temperatures (above, say, 200 K). These two observations helped to shape the theoretical understanding of the processes behind spin relaxation in metals. It is now generally accepted that electron spins in (nonmagnetic) metals decay by scattering off impurities (at low temperatures where T1 is constant) and phonons (at higher temperatures where T1 grows linearly with increasing temperature). The spin-flip probability of such processes is finite because of the finite spin-orbit interaction induced by either host ions or impurities (this is the so called Elliott-Yafet mechanism of spin relaxation [\cite=elliott54]). We have recently performed the first realistic calculation of T1 in a metal (aluminum) [\cite=fabian98]. Our calculation not only provides the first direct proof of the validity of the Elliott-Yafet mechanism, but also shows that by engineering the band structure of metals (or semiconductors) it is possible to tailor spin relaxation (e.g., T1 can be changed by orders of magnitude by doping, straining, alloying, or changing dimensionality).

An important development came with the discovery of spin injection by Johnson and Silsbee [\cite=johnson85]. In the original experiment spin-polarized electrons were injected from a ferromagnetic electrode (permalloy) into a nonmagnetic metal (aluminum), and the spin diffusion length was monitored. This method of measuring LS (and thus spin lifetime) has a great potential since, unlike CESR, spin injection does not need an applied magnetic field which, in some cases, radically affects spin relaxation processes. In addition to providing a useful method for measuring spin relaxation, the Johnson-Silsbee spin injection experiment brought about a whole new field of electronics: spintronics. Indeed, spin injection is the most natural way to integrate spin dynamics with electronic transport in electronic devices. There is no need for magnetic field or radiation to excite spin-polarized electrons. One only needs ferromagnetic electrodes. The last truly fundamental obstacle in the progress towards integrating the new spintronic with the traditional semiconductor technology has been recently overcome with the discovery of spin injection into a semiconductor [\cite=hammar99] [\cite=semiconductor].

In addition to be able to create the population of spin-polarized carriers, we also need a way to monitor and control the dynamics of spin processes in electronic materials. This quest has been pioneered by Kikkawa and Awschalom [\cite=awschalom99]. In a typical experiment spin-polarized electrons in a semiconductor like GaAs are excited by a circularly-polarized light and then the electrons' spin evolution is monitored at small (picosecond) time intervals. Several new exciting results came from such experiments on semiconductors [\cite=kikkawa97]: a dramatic (two orders of magnitude) increase of electron spin lifetime with increased doping, unusually large (hundreds of micrometers) spin diffusion length, and the ability to optically control nuclear spin polarization (with electron spins acting as intermediaries between light and nuclear spins).

Fabricating hybrid structures which would combine a semiconductor and a superconductor would allow investigating some of the aforementioned features and determining the degree of an extrinsically induced carrier spin polarization in the semiconductor. This could be realized by using Andreev reflection which governs transport properties at low applied bias. In this two-particle process an electron incident to the interface at the semiconductor side is accompanied by a second electron of the opposite spin. Both electrons are then transfered into the superconductor where they form a Cooper pair. The probability (measured by, e.g., conductance) of such processes strongly depends on the amount of spin polarization and the spin transparency of the interface [\cite=zutic99] [\cite=zutic99a].

Material inhomogeneities can also act favorably and be tailored to give desired effect for spin-polarized transport. We illustrate this in our proposal of the spin-polarized p-n junction [\cite=zutic00]. Its simple realization would consist of shining circularly-polarized light on the p-doped side of a usual p-n junction. This would create a spin-polarized population of electron-hole pairs. By considering a p-n junction shorter than the spin-diffusion length, combined with a sharp doping profile, it is feasible to create enhanced magnetization in the interior of the semiconductor with the spatial dependence following that of the carrier concentration. Such a p-n junction could be used as a building block for a novel spin transistor applications which would utilize both spin and charge degrees of freedom [\cite=zutic00].

SPIN-BASED QUANTUM COMPUTATION

Among all possible spintronic devices, by far the most revolutionary is the proposed spin-based quantum computer (QC) which has the promise to vastly outperform classical computers in certain tasks such as factoring large numbers and searching large databases [\cite=QCreview]. In QCs electron or nuclear spins are used as the basic building blocks. The spin-up and -down states of an electron or a nucleus provide the quantum bit (qubit), in analogy with "0" and "1" in a classical computer. However, as a quantum mechanical object, a spin can have not only up and down states, but also arbitrary superpositions of these two states. This inherent parallelism and other quantum mechanical properties such as entanglement and unitary evolution are the fundamental differences between QCs and classical computers.

In the search for appropriate hardwares for a QC, many proposals have been put forward [\cite=QCreview]. Here we focus on the spin-based solid-state models [\cite=HD]. One of the first proposals [\cite=LD] suggests using quantum-dot-trapped electron spins as qubits. Here a single electron is trapped in a gated horizontal GaAs quantum dot, with pulsed local magnetic field and inter-dot gate voltage governing the single-qubit and two-qubit operation. Another proposal replaces the quantum dot electrons by donor electrons [\cite=Vrijen]. Here varying the gyromagnetic ratio in a compositionally modulated SiGe alloy allows electron spin resonance for single qubit operations and exchange interaction for two-qubit operations. One important advantage of electron spins is their "maneuverability": electrons are mobile and can be manipulated by both electric and magnetic fields.

Aside from electron-spin-based QC models, there are also nuclear-spin-based proposals, such as the one using nuclear spins of phosphorus donor atoms in Si as qubits [\cite=Kane]. Here external gates are used to tune the nuclear magnetic resonance frequency, and donor electrons are the intermediaries between neighboring nuclear spins, introducing two-qubit operations through electron exchange interaction and hyperfine interaction. The main advantage of nuclear spin qubits is their exceedingly long coherence time, which allows many coherent operations. Indeed, bulk solution NMR is one of the most advanced QC architectures [\cite=QCreview], even though its ensemble-average character prompts some researchers to question [\cite=Caves] whether it really possesses all the quantum mechanical powers needed for tasks such as factoring.

The major difficulties facing various QC models are achieving precise control over unitary evolutions and maintaining quantum mechanical coherence. While traditional electronic devices deal with large numbers of electrons at a time, while in spin-based QCs one has to be able to precisely control spins of individual electrons. Furthermore, the electron spins need to be essentially isolated from their environment so that their dynamics is governed by quantum mechanics. If this isolation is imperfect, the spins' quantum information will leak into their environment, and the dynamics of the spins will become irreversible and classical, so that the QC operation will be disrupted.

Spin decoherence has many different channels such as spin interaction with boundaries, impurities, host nuclei, even with external controls. For example, one common approach to tune the exchange interaction between electrons or electrons and nuclei is to use electrical gates which are connected through a transmission line to the outside. External noise such as Johnson-Nyquist noise can thus cause fluctuations in the gate voltage, which in turn cause errors in the exchange. The rate of this error can be as large as a few MHz [\cite=HD], which corresponds to the limits of the currently available error correction schemes. Another error during exchange is caused by inhomogeneous magnetic fields [\cite=Inhomo]. In essence, the different Zeeman couplings of two neighboring electrons cause mixing of the two-electron singlet and triplet states, therefore preventing the electron spin states from complete disentanglement for swap. This error is proportional to the square of the inhomogeneity [\cite=Inhomo], and can usually be corrected. Indeed, there is an existing scheme which can circumvent this error [\cite=parallel]. Furthermore, it has been proposed [\cite=Lidar] that one can utilize certain decoherence-free subspace of four quantum dots as qubits, relying completely on exchange for all operations and eliminating the use of any external magnetic field. Such a scheme is more difficult to realize experimentally, but it does provide the advantage of smaller decoherence because of fewer noise channels.