=1

Stability of the Outer Planets in Multiresonant Configurations with a Self-gravitating Planetesimal Disk

Introduction

The formation of the Solar System is generally believed to involve, during its last phases, a period of significant radial migration of the giant planets due to their interaction with a massive, remnant planetesimal disk located outward of the outermost planet (for a review see Levison et al. 2007). This planetesimal-driven migration involves the inward migration of Jupiter, the outward migration of Saturn, Uranus and Neptune, and the dispersal of most of the planetesimals in the disc into orbits at much greater distances from the Sun.

The current scenario has evolved from the original suggestion of Fernandez & Ip (1984), then developed by Malhotra (1993), in which the outer planets migrate as they exchange angular momentum efficiently with the planetesimals in the outer Solar System while the planetesimals are dispersed to the Oort cloud and beyond. Early numerical simulations of this process (Hahn & Malhotra 1999, Gomes et al. 2004) indicated that Jupiter migrates inward typically by a fraction of an AU, while Saturn, Uranus and Neptune migrate outwards changing their initial semimajor axis by approximately 10, 50 and 100%, respectively.

In a series of papers by Gomes et al. (2005), Tsiganis et al. (2005) and Morbidelli et al. (2005), a variant of the migration scenario proposed by Malhotra (1993, 1995) was presented. As part of what is now known as the Nice model for the early evolution of the Solar System, an initially very compact configuration of the outer Solar System was proposed as the condition at the time the primordial gaseous nebula was dispersed. A distinctive feature of the initial configuration originally proposed in the Nice model was the fact that it is unstable on a timescale of several hundred megayears, with Saturn crossing the 2:1 mean motion resonance (MMR) with Jupiter, and leading to a major rearrangement of the outer Solar System.

In recent years, the Nice model has undergone major revisions. The model now has incorporated the idea that in the initial orbits of the outer planets are in a multi-resonant configuration, as expected following an apriori gas-driven migration phase (Masset & Snellgrove 2006, Morbidelli et al. 2007 and Batygin & Brown 2010, among others). Such configurations are known to be stable if only the gravitational interaction among the planets is considered (Batygin & Brown 2010). Secondly, as argued by Brasser et al. (2007), the stability of the inner solar system during the period of outer planet migration seems to require an abrupt change in Jupiter's orbit (see also Minton & Malhotra 2009). This change can in principle result from a close encounter of Jupiter with an ice giant that may eventually be ejected from the solar system, leading to the so-called "jumping Jupiter" revision of the Nice model (Morbidelli et al. 2009b, 2010, Brasser et al. 2009, Walsh & Morbidelli 2011, Agnor & Lin 2012). Finally, by using an approximate treatment for the self-gravitational interaction in the planetesimal disk (an effect not previously considered), Levison et al. (2011) suggested that, starting from a stable multi-resonant configuration, self-gravity instabilities slowly develop and can lead to the rapid migration of Neptune into the planetesimal disk, on a timescale consistent with the occurrence of the Late Heavy Bombardment (LHB) several hundred megayears after gas disk dispersal.

In this paper we present a series of N-body simulations that probably resemble the dynamical evolution the outer Solar System had after the primordial gaseous nebula was dispersed, in order to study in some detail the stability of the system taking into account self-consistently the gravitational interactions among the planetesimals. To our knowledge, with the exception of the work by Levison et al. (2011), previous studies of planetesimal driven migration have considered these small bodies to interact gravitationally only with the planets but not among themselves. This approximation is only justified on account of the great computational expense of the direct N-body simulations required to model this process. In this paper, we present results of the first numerical simulations to study the effect of a self-gravitating disk on the process of planetesimal driven migration in a fully self-consistent manner.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section [\ref=sec:model] we present the details of our model, we describe the methodology used and the cases studied. In §[\ref=sec:results] we present the results of a series of simulations with different model parameters. A review of some of the assumptions made in our study and some of the implications for the scenarios of planetary system evolution are discussed in §[\ref=sec:discussion]. Finally, in Section [\ref=sec:conclusions] we summarize our main results and present our conclusions.

Model Description

Models of the process of planetesimal driven migration generally assume that the process begins in earnest once the gaseous component of the protoplanetary disk is dispersed somehow, at least to the point that dynamical effects of the gas can be neglected. In this study we adopt this scenario in order to make a direct comparison to results from other authors. We note, however, that preliminary results of an ongoing investigation by our group, suggest that the remnant gaseous component of protoplanetary disks during the so-called transition disk phase, can have important consequences on the evolution of the planetesimal population and the outer planets.

We consider the gravitational force of the Sun, the 4 outer planets with their present day mass, and a massive disk of much smaller bodies representing the remnant planetesimal disk exterior to the planetary region. A novel feature of our simulations, in comparison to previous studies of planetesimal-driven migration, is the inclusion of the gravitational force among the planetesimals themselves in a fully self-consistent manner.

Planetary configuration

In accordance to the latest versions of the Nice model, based on the results of Masset & Snellgrove (2006) and other authors (e.g. Morbidelli et al. 2007, Nesvorny & Brown 2010 and Zhang & Zhou 2010), we assume that initially the outer planets were locked in mean motion resonance (MMR) with each other. Specifically, we adopt some of the multiresonant configurations described in Table [\ref=tbl-1] of Batygin & Brown (2010) as a frequent outcome of their study of resonant trapping in gaseous disks. In our notation, a 3J:2S, 4S:3U, 4U:3N configuration is one in which Jupiter and Saturn are in a 3:2 MMR (i.e. Jupiter makes 3 revolutions around the Sun while Saturn orbits twice), Saturn and Uranus are in a 4:3 MMR and Uranus and Neptune are also in a 4:3 MMR.

The precise value of the main orbital parameters used for these initial conditions are shown in Table [\ref=tbl-2] (more details can be obtained by mailing the corresponding author). These configurations are dynamically stable (without a planetesimal disk) over gigayear timescales. As can be seen in Figure [\ref=fig1], which shows the evolution of the semimajor axis, a, and eccentricity, e, of each of the planets considered in case A of our simulations. The behavior of the other multiresonant planetary configurations we have considered without the planetesimal is very similar. For reference, we include in Table [\ref=tbl-2] the average value of this parameters corresponding to the 3J:2S, 3S:2U, 4U:3N multiresonant system considered by Levison et al. (2011).

Planetesimal disk model

Following Levison et al. (2011), who studied the effect of the planetesimal disk self-gravity on the equilibrium of the system for the first time in an approximate manner, we assume that initially the disk extends from a radius located outwards of the outermost planet, Rdisk, to an outer radius approximately at the distance of Neptune's current orbital semimajor axis, Rout. The inner disk radius is taken as a parameter in our model with several values considered as given in Table 1. Note that the Hill radius for Neptune at the corresponding distance in these compact configurations is approximately 0.31 AU, so that all values of Rdisk considered are more than 3 Hill radii from the outermost planet; i.e. outside its so-called feeding zone. The outer radius for all cases considered is taken at 31.5 AU, in concordance with the study of Levison et al. (2011).

On account of the computation time required for these simulations, the disk is restricted to be made of Np  =  2000 particles for most of our calculations. Although our present computational capabilities do not permit considering a much greater number of particles, in the Discussion section we address the probable implications of this choice briefly. The mass of each particle is then mp  =  Mdisk / Np, where Mdisk is the total disk mass. For the disk mass values adopted in this study (Table 1), the planetesimal mass ranges from ~   0.01 to 0.05 ME or between 1 and 4 Lunar masses approximately; where ME is the mass of the Earth. Although this mass is still a factor of a few greater than the average mass of the dwarf planets, which can probably be considered the largest planetesimals, including a greater number of planetesimals, with a self consistent treatment of gravitational forces, is beyond the limit of our present computational capabilities.

The mass of particles we have considered is comparable to that in the studies of Hahn & Malhotra (1999), which is in the range 0.01 and 0.2 ME, and also of Gomes et al. (2004), who consider planetesimals of approximately 0.02 ME. In both cases however, planetesimal-planetesimal interactions were not considered. The planetesimal mass we have considered is also comparable to the mass considered for gravitational perturbers in the study of Levison et al. (2011).

The mass surface density in the planetesimal disk, Σ, is assumed to be initially axisymmetric and to have a power law dependence on the radial distance from the Sun, Σ  =  Σ0R- 1, following Levison et al. (2011) and consistent with minimum mass solar nebula models. The value of Σ0 is adopted to reproduce the total disk mass in a specific model. The planetesimal disk is assumed to be cold, with eccentricities, e, and inclinations, i (in radians) chosen randomly from uniform number distributions in the range

[formula]

.

Numerical details

We use the Mercury6.5 code, developed by Chambers (1999), to study the dynamics of the four outer planets and the planetesimal disk. It uses a fixed time-step for the symplectic integrator coupled with a Bulirsch-Stoer (B-S) scheme, which is used to follow close encounters among bodies: we set the error tolerance of the B-S integrator to 10- 12. The B-S scheme is used whenever the distance between two bodies is less than 3 Hill radii of the largest body.

Our simulations were in general carried out for up to 70 Myr. The relatively short timescale we have considered is related to the main purpose of our study, which is to assess the stability of these systems and not to determine the long-term final planetary configuration. The time-step used in our simulations is 186.4 days, as commonly adopted in outer solar system migration simulations (e.g. Hahn & Malhotra 1999). The simulations presented in this paper were carried out in a Linux PC, with OpenSuse 11.4 as operating system and a gfortran-2.4 compiler.

Results

We have carried out a series of simulations aimed to understand the conditions under which planetesimal-driven migration, starting from multiresonant planetary configurations, becomes unstable. To this end, several initial conditions for the planets and for the planetesimal disk, were considered (see Table 1). In the following we present our results by considering the effect of varying the disk mass and inner radius for each of the multiresonant initial conditions studied.

For comparison, we have computed cases A, F and K (described in Table 1) with the same disk properties considered by Levison et al. (2011) as their fiducial disk model; Mdisk  =  50 ME and Rdisk  =  18 AU. However, the planetary configurations we consider (see Tables 1 and 2), differ slightly from the 3J:2S, 3S:2U, 4U:3N multiresonant system that these authors study. Levison et al. (2011) take their initial planetary configuration from Morbidelli et al. (2007), and report and average semimajor axis for Jupiter approximately 10% smaller than in our cases. As a consequence, the initial semi-major axis of the outer planet in the configuration considered by Levison et al. (2011), is smaller in all but the 3J:2S,4S:3U,4U:3N configuration we consider. This configuration is the most compact we studied and also the one that destabilizes at an earlier time for all cases.

The main effect of planetesimal-planetesimal interactions on the evolution of the system can be seen comparing Figure [\ref=fig2] and Figure [\ref=fig3] which show the evolution of systems without and with self-gravity in the planetesimal disk, respectively. Both figures shows several snapshots of the a - e and a - i phase space domain, of a system corresponding to the configuration of case A. Without the effect of self-gravity, Figure [\ref=fig2], the system is not unstable on the timescale considered, 10 Myr. The behavior of such system is consistent with the results of typical planetesimal-driven migration simulations starting from Nice model-like initial conditions. If we include the gravitational interaction among planetesimals, the system undergoes a dynamical instability in approximately 5 Myr. Comparing the first and second row panels of Figure [\ref=fig3], which illustrate the system's dynamical state initially and after 0.1 Myr respectively, we see that one of the main effects of the inter-planetesimal gravitational interactions is the heating of the disk, i.e. the increase in orbital eccentricities and inclinations also referred to as gravitational stirring. We discuss this process in more detail, and its dependence on the number of particles used in our simulation, in the following section.

As can be seen in Figure [\ref=fig3], the disk remains in a quiescent state for a few Myr (for most cases considered) as the number of planetesimals dispersed into orbits capable of having close encounters with the outermost planets increases. The cumulative effect of these interactions, exchanging angular momentum with Neptune and Uranus mainly, leads to a growth of the orbital eccentricity for these planets until the multiresonant state among the giant planets is broken. The instability manifests as a very fast orbital rearrangement of all planets. The outward migration of Uranus and Neptune in turn leads to a greater number of planetesimal-planet interactions and even faster migration into the disk until it is mostly dispersed. In several cases studied, the planetary system is strongly unstable with one or both ice giants ejected from the system, or even catastrophic as with one of them colliding with the giant planets as indicated by the numerical simulations.

Effect of the disk mass

In order to assess the effect of the planetesimal disk mass on the evolution of each of our initial multiresonant configurations, we have carried out simulations with Mdisk  =  25,50 and [formula]. In all cases, we consider the same inner and outer disk radii of the fiducial model of Levison et al. (2011). Disk mass is varied by changing the mass of each of the particles representing the planetesimals keeping the number of planetesimals constant.

The time evolution of the planetary orbital parameters, a and e, for all three multiresonant configurations we considered are shown in Figures [\ref=a_vs_t_vs_Md] and [\ref=e_vs_t_vs_Md], respectively. In these figures each row corresponds to a different planetary multiresonant initial condition. We find that, as expected, the instability arises earlier for more massive disks in which gravitational stirring increases the amount (and cumulative mass) of planetesimals interacting with the planets.

With the exception of case G, all systems considered are unstable on a timescale shorter than 42 Myr, as a result of the interaction with the self-gravitating planetesimal disk. Case G also becomes unstable but on a slightly greater timescale, less than 70 Myr. It is worth noting that case G corresponds to the combination of: (a) the less massive disk we have considered and (b) the planetary configuration in which Uranus and Neptune are most separated.

Effect of the disk inner radius

We have also studied the effect of the location of the inner radius of the planetesimal disk, Rdisk, on the stability of these systems. To do so, we fix the disk mass at 50 [formula], following Levison et al. (2011), and vary Rdisk between 16 and 20 AU. The results for all initial planetary configurations as a function of Rdisk are displayed in Figures [\ref=a_vs_t_vs_Rd] and [\ref=e_vs_t_vs_Rd], which show the evolution of the semimajor axis, a, and eccentricity, e, respectively, for each of the planets in our simulations.

We find that the time for the onset of the instability depends strongly on the value of Rdisk. In going from an inner disk radius of 16 AU to 20 AU (a 25% increment), the time for onset of the instability, tinst, increases by a factor of about 2-6. This result is reminiscent of the results of Gomes et al. (2005) who find that the initial location of the inner disk radius must be fine tuned to a specific value in order to reproduce the LHB timescale, if this phenomenon is to be related to a planetary instability. Once again, as in our simulations with different disk mass, all cases considered with a 50 [formula] planetesimal disk, the outer Solar System becomes unstable within a time scale of 30 Myr. For comparison, we have carried out simulations of the three cases with different inner radius, for the 3J:2S, 4S:3U, 4U:3N configuration and the same initial distribution of planetesimals, but without the effect of planetesimal-planetesimal interactions. In all cases, the system remains stable for a timescale an order of magnitude greater, or more, than that with selfgravitating planetesimal disks.

Insight into the instability

An additional feature of the evolution of the unstable systems, is the fact that the planets remain locked in resonance until the instability arises. This is evident in Figure [\ref=res_ang] which shows the mean motion resonant angles which, for the 3J:2S, 4S:3U, and 4U:3N initial planetary configuration, can be written as:

[formula]

[formula]

[formula]

[formula]

[formula]

[formula]

where λi  =  Mi  +  ωi  +  Ωi is the mean longitude for the i-th planet, with Mi being the mean anomaly, ωi the argument of the planet's periapsis and Ωi the longitude of the ascending node. Also, ϖi is the longitude of the orbit's periapsis.

The behavior seen in Figure [\ref=res_ang] is qualitatively similar for all systems before the instability develops, namely: (a) the θ1 and θ2 resonant arguments for Jupiter and Saturn librate about 0 and 180o, respectively. (b) Either the θ3 or θ4 resonant arguments for Saturn and Uranus clearly librate while the other argument may circulate, and (c) at least one of the resonant arguments θ5 or θ6 for Uranus and Neptune librates.

The development of the dynamical instability is similar for all systems studied and involves a gradual increase in the number of planetesimals moving inside the disk inner boundary, Rdisk, and interacting strongly with the planets. This leads to a gradual increase of the orbital eccentricities of Uranus and Neptune to values such that the MMR of these planets is broken and they can have close encounters. This is illustrated in Figure [\ref=instability_details], which shows the time evolution of the number of planetesimals in Neptune crossing orbits, i.e. planetesimals with perihelia less than Neptune's aphelia (at a given time), for 3 of the cases we simulated corresponding to disks with Mdisk  =  50ME and Rdisk  =  18 AU. For comparison, we also show the behavior of Neptune's perihelia, Uranus aphelia and the eccentricity of their orbits.

The cumulative effect of the interaction of the dispersed planetesimals (as a result of self-gravity) with the ice giants leads, as the system approaches instability, to an increase in their eccentricity until their resonant state is broken. At such point their semi-major axes generally increase in an abrupt manner (as shown in Figure [\ref=instability_details]), suggests that a threshold in the interaction between planetesimals and the ice giants is triggered as the number of these gradually increases. Roughly, for the cases shown in Figure [\ref=instability_details], the total mass that has interacted with Neptune at the time of the onset of the instability, tinst, is between 2 and 3 Earth masses. This provides a possible explanation to the fact that disks with a mass smaller than the mass of the ice giants are not capable of destabilizing the system on the timescales considered in this study.

Figure [\ref=instability_avse] shows the evolution of the planets in phase space (a - e) as the system crosses the instability. The interaction with the planetesimal disk leads to a gradual increase in the eccentricity of the ice giants (related to angular momentum) while keeping the semimajor axis (energy related) more or less constant. Also shown are the boundaries of the resonances of Saturn, Uranus and Neptune with their interior planet and of Jupiter with the exterior planet. These are estimated by assuming that each planet is the test particle in the context of the restricted 3-body problem which, in the so-called pendulum approximations, allows one to estimate the width of a given first order resonance as described in Holmes et al. (2003). As can be seen in Figure [\ref=instability_avse], the instability occurs when either Uranus or Neptune evolve toward a dynamical state in which either is not locked in resonance, resulting in a fast disruption of the planetary configuration.

Discussion

In this section we revisit some of the basic assumptions made in our study and how these affect the interpretation of our results. In addition, we discuss some of the implications of our results on the theory of planetary system evolution.

Self-gravity

The simulations presented above are intended to demonstrate that the inclusion of the gravitational interaction between the planetesimals and planets in a compact and multiresonant initial configuration, as those proposed as part of the Nice model, renders the systems highly unstable. Implicit in this statement is the idea that, without self-gravity in the planetesimal disk, the planets in these systems would remain locked in resonance for a very long time, as suggested by Levison et al. (2011).

To test the above, we carried out numerical simulations of some of the initial multiresonant conditions (specified in Tables 1 and 2) but removing the effect of self gravity, i.e. assuming that the planetesimals interact gravitationally with the planets but not among themselves (as usually done in studies of planetesimal-driven migration). We find that some of these systems are also unstable, but on a timescale of several tens to hundreds of Myr. Out of the 3 systems tested in this manner (cases A, F and K), one is found to be unstable on a timescale of less than 100 Myr. As we are focusing on the effect of disk self-gravity in this study, we have decided to leave a further exploration of this issue for future contributions.

Our main dynamical result brings into question the presumed stability of multiresonant configurations and suggests that early planetesimal driven migration, and outer disk dispersal, is to be expected for a wide range of initial planetary system configurations.

Implications for the early evolution of the Solar System

The previous results indicate that, when gravitational interactions among the planetesimals are considered, several, perhaps most, of the multiresonant planetary configurations can become unstable on a timescale of less than a few tens of Myr. This posses a serious difficulty for Solar System formation scenarios in which the LHB is explained as resulting from the unstable, fast migration of the outer planets and the consequent perturbation of planetesimal disk, as proposed for example in the Nice model.

Given the early development of the instability of multiresonant planets with a self-gravitating planetesimal disk, some of the alternative scenarios that could be envisioned for the LHB are the following.

(a) That the disk inner radius was at a distance much greater than 20 AU when the gaseous component of the solar nebula was dispersed, which marks the beginning of our simulated dynamical evolution. As can be seen from Figure [\ref=tinst_vs_Rd], which shows the time for the development of the instability as a function of the inner disk radius of the planetesimal disk, a value of Rdisk much greater than 20 AU is required to have an instability development time of tinst  ≈  700 Myr; that is timescale of the LHB.

This initial location of the inner boundary of the planetesimal disk, at such a great distance from the outermost planet, poses in our view a difficult conundrum. While it is generally believed that planets as they form are able to clear material (gas and planetesimals) from an annulus in the vicinity of their location, the so-called feeding zone (Lissauer, 1993) is thought to extend only to a few Hill radii from each planet's position. In the configuration suggested above, the inner radius of the planetesimal disk is at a distance of more than 30 Hill radii from the outermost planet. It is not evident why planetesimals were cleared, or were not formed in the first place, only between approximately 12 and 25 AU.

(b) Another possible explanation to obtain a long tinst, is that the initial mass of the planetesimal disk was much smaller than is usually considered. Nice model studies have regularly used Mdisk around 35 [formula], and the latest incarnation of the model favors a slightly heavier disk of 50 [formula] (Levison et al. 2011). However, we find that even a disk with 25 M[formula] can destabilize the system on a timescale more than an order of magnitude shorter than that required for the LHB.

Using a power law fit to the resulting timescale for the development of the instability as a function of the disk mass, determined from our simulations as shown in Figure [\ref=tinst_vs_Md], suggests that [formula] is required if the LHB is to be explained in terms of orbital dynamical instability. However, one would expect that very low mass disks may be altogether unable to destabilize the planetary system, as the mass and angular momentum contained in the planetesimal disk is smaller than that of any of the outer planets. We can estimate a lower limit for the disk mass required to significantly modify Neptune's orbit by comparing the initial angular momentum of the planet, LN  ≈  MN VK(aN) aN, with the total angular momentum in the disk, Ldisk  ≈  Mdisk VK(Rout) Rout. The requirement that Ldisk  >  LN, leads to the condition [formula] for the planetesimal disk to destabilize the outermost planet.

(c) It could also be possible that the Solar System did not start from a multiresonant, compact configuration as it is generally proposed in the latest incarnations of the Nice model. Multiresonant configurations are believed to be the natural end product of planet rearrangement due to gas-driven migration in the primeval gaseous solar nebula. The presumed stability of multiresonant configurations is further invoked to explain the long delay for the planetary configuration to undergo a fast dynamical instability and the consequent stirring of the outer planetesimal disk and the LHB (Levison et al. 2011). However, as we have shown in this work, this belief is not entirely justified. In fact, our results suggest that several compact configurations are not stable over a 100 Myr timescale when the effects of a self-gravitating planetesimal disk, of structural properties similar to those assumed in the framework of the Nice model, are taken into account.

One could envision that the timescale necessary for the formation of all the giant planets and their locking into a multiresonant configuration did not exactly coincide with the timescale for the dispersal of the gaseous component of protoplanetary disks. This is particularly true if gas dispersal is related to photoevaporation of the disk or any other process unrelated to the formation of the planets themselves. In such case, the early planetary system may be left free of gas so that no further gas-driven migration is possible before the planets reach the proposed compact, multiresonant configuration.

The subsequent evolution of these initially compact systems caught outside of full multiresonance at the time of gas dispersal, is beyond the scope of the present study. However, one would expect that if the configuration is compact enough, the evolution could be similar to that of the original Nice model as presented in Gomes et al. (2005) and Tsiganis et al. (2005). On the other hand, if gas driven migration stops while the ice giants are located far from Jupiter and Saturn, the evolution can be expected to proceed in a relatively smooth manner as studied by Hahn & Malhotra (1999) or Gomes et al. (2004). It must be stressed however, that in these studies the effect of planetesimal-planetesimal interactions was not considered.

(d) Finally, one further possibility consistent with the present study, is that the unstable rearrangement of the solar system is not linked to the LHB. In this scenario the Solar System underwent an unstable rearrangement shortly after gas was dispersed, on a timescale of 10's of Myr, so that the much later LHB is not related to a planetesimal-driven orbital instability. Although there are strong arguments against alternative scenarios for the origin of the LHB, such as that proposed by Chambers (2007) involving the effect of a small planet originally present between Mars and Jupiter (e.g. Brasser & Morbidelli 2011), it is worth noting that such scenario can not be entirely ruled out as a particular solution on dynamical grounds, albeit of a low probability. This situation, is reminiscent of the jumping Jupiter scenario invoked in the current version of the Nice model.

Model Limitations

The important implications of our study, which may affect our understanding of the evolution of the Solar System, hints toward the importance of careful modeling of the disk of planetesimals in order put on firmer grounds the previous conclusion.

Our numerical approach does not allow us, due to computational limitations, to follow the evolution of these planetary systems in a self-consistent way for a LHB-like timescale of several hundred million years. However, a simple extrapolation of our instability results, as a function of disk mass and inner radius, suggests that if the LHB is to be explained in terms of a dynamical instability of the early Solar System, the initial outer planetesimal disk must have had been much less than 20 Earth masses and/or the disk inner radius must have been located at more than 10 AU from the outermost planet. Either condition has important implications for the preceding stages in the evolution of the Solar System. An even more radical solution to this conundrum is the possibility that the LHB is not directly related to a dynamical instability of the outer planets.

Although we consider our calculations to represent the state of the art in the study of planetesimal-driven migration, on account of their self-consistent treatment, it is worth pointing out some factors related to our present computational limitations that may affect our conclusions. In our study each particle has a mass ranging from (0.75-3)×  1026g that is ≈  (4 - 17) times the mass of Eris, the largest of the dwarf planets. Considering that the present mass of the Kuiper Belt is believed to be ≈  1 / 500 of the mass assumed to be originally present in the outer planetesimal disk (Gladman et al. 2001), and assuming that the size distribution of large planetesimals was originally similar to the present one in the KB, one would expect that the original number of dwarf planet-like bodies to be in the vicinity of a few times 103. This implies that each of the small bodies in our simulations corresponds to approximately 5 dwarf planet-like bodies originally believed to be present in the Solar System.

The above approximation does not seem too bad, but it is known that the number of particles, N, in an N-body simulation affects the dynamical evolution of self-gravitating systems (e.g. Binney & Tremaine 1998). It is possible that an order of magnitude increase in the number of small bodies, as predicted by the present day size distribution of KBOs, can have an important effect on the dynamics of the Solar System. For example, on one hand, the presence of a very large number of small bodies allows for a further distribution of the interaction-energy among these by incrementing the number of degrees of freedom of the whole system. In this way, the small bodies may behave as a stabilizing sink, that is probably dependent on their number, for the development of the instability as is suggested by the results of this paper. On the other hand, the actual behavior of the disk particles is dependent on the number of particles used to describe it in what is usually called numerical disk-heating. In this process the velocity dispersion of the disk particles, σp, modeled as a diffusion process, grows with time t as [formula]; where Dp is a diffusion coefficient, p a parameter and σ0 a constant (e.g. Lacey 1991, Velázquez 2005). The values of Dp and p are model dependent and they have to be evaluated numerically under specific physical conditions. However they show a dependency on the number of particles in the system, for example, [formula], with α  ≈  0.6 for galactic disks (Velázquez 2005). Nonetheless, they point to the fact of an effect of the number of particles used in the modeling for the evolution of the planetesimal disk. All this lead us to suggest that future works should consider some of these matters, although at present they currently represent a formidable computational challenge.

Conclusions

We have carried out a series of direct numerical simulations of the the dynamical evolution of the early outer Solar System in the context of the Nice-2 model. Our aim has been to study this process, for the first time, in a fully self-consistent manner, i.e. by taking into account the gravitational interaction between all bodies included in the simulations.

Our starting point was a set of initially compact, multiresonant planetary configurations, similar to those proposed in the study of Levison et al. (2011). In difference with previous attempts to model such systems in the framework of an approximate treatment of the N-body problem (e.g. Levison et al. 2011), we find that a dynamical instability of the outer planets develops on a short timescale, of less than 70 Myr in all the initial configurations we explored. The early development of the instability is directly related to the effect of planetesimal-planetesimal interactions, as the resulting dynamical heating of the planetesimal disk accelerates the interaction with the outer ice giants which leads to the planetary instability.

The above result has important consequences on our understanding of the dynamics of the early Solar System. Our results suggest that when the inter-planetesimal gravitational interactions are included in a fully self-consistent manner, the dynamical instability of the early Solar System invoked in the context of the Nice model to explain the LHB, occurs much sooner than the several hundred Myr timescale indicated by the lunar crater record (Tera et al. 1974). Although further studies are required, particularly increasing the number of particles representing the planetesimal disk, these results bring into question the explanation of the LHB in terms of a planetary dynamical instability.