.sty

Introduction

Unification models adduce the main differences between the observed properties of different classes of AGNs to the anisotropy of the radiation emitted by the active nucleus (see Urry & Padovani 1995 for a review). In particular, for low luminosity radio-loud objects, namely BL Lacs and FR I radio galaxies, it is believed that this effect is mainly due to relativistic beaming. Within this scenario, the emission from the inner regions of a relativistic jet dominates the observed radiation in BL Lacs, while in FR I, whose jet is observed at larger angles with respect to the line of sight, this component is strongly debeamed. Evidence for this unification scheme includes the power and morphology of the extended radio emission of BL Lacs and the properties of their host galaxies, which are similar to those of FR I. Despite this global agreement, it should be stressed that beaming factors inferred from the broad band spectral properties of blazars are significantly and systematically larger than those suggested by radio luminosity data.

Thanks to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), the optical counterparts of the radio cores have been recently discovered in FR I galaxies (Chiaberge et al. 1999). In this paper we directly compare the properties of the optical and radio cores of FR I radio galaxies belonging to the 3CR catalog with those of two complete samples of BL Lacs derived from the 1Jy catalog and from the Einstein Slew Survey.

Core versus extended luminosity

We firstly consider the optical and radio core luminosities separately, comparing the nuclear emission of FR I and BL Lacs for bins of equal extended radio power (see Fig 1 of Chiaberge et al. 2000). The BL Lacs are at least 4 order of magnitude brighter in the optical than FR I nuclei. As the core radiation of BL Lacs is enhanced by relativistic beaming, we can derive the bulk Lorentz factors Γ requested to account for the observed spread, if typical observing angles are known. If BL Lacs are observed at an angle θ  ~  1 / Γ and [formula] is the median observing angle of FR I galaxies, bulk velocities with Γ ~  4 - 6 are requested to account for the optical enhancement of BL Lacs in each bin of extended luminosity. A similar result is obtained by comparing the radio core emission (e.g. Kollgaard et al. 1996). However, as already mentioned, such values are significantly and systematically lower than those required by other independent means, such as superluminal motions and high energy spectral constraints in both LBLs and HBLs. These in fact require values of the Doppler factor δ (=  Γ for a viewing angle θ = 1 / Γ) in the range 15-20 for the region emitting most of the radiation in both HBLs and LBLs.

FR I and BL Lac in the Lo and Lr plane and jet velocity structures

In Fig. [\ref=fig1]a we show the optical vs radio core luminosity for the three samples. In order to determine how beaming affects the observed luminosities and thus how objects could be connected in the Lo - Lr plane, we consider the SED of BL Lacs, observationally much better determined, and calculate the observed spectrum of the misaligned objects, by taking into account the relativistic transformations. In fact an important and previously neglected point, is that these transformations depend on the spectral index in the band considered, which in itself might change as a function of the degree of beaming. Therefore, in order to correctly de-beam the SED of BL Lacs, a continuous representation of the SED and an estimate of the bulk Lorentz factor of the emitting region are needed (it is again assumed θ = 1 / Γ). We derive both the continuous description of the SED and the bulk Lorentz factor of the source by adopting a homogeneous synchrotron self-Compton emission model. We model the observed SED of two sources (Mkn 421 and PKS 0735+178), representative of High and Low Energy-peaked BL Lacs (HBL and LBL), respectively. We then calculate the corresponding observed SEDs for different orientations. Clearly the net effect of debeaming is a "shift" of the SED towards lower luminosities and energies. As expected, for [formula] the resulting "debeamed" BL Lac component is about four orders of magnitude below the radio galaxy region in the optical, and two/four in the radio band (see Fig [\ref=fig1]b). While equivalently incompatible with the FR I population properties, the HBL and LBL move on different trails. This effect is due to the different shape of their SED. The simplest and rather plausible hypothesis to account for this discrepancy within the unification scenario is to assume a structure in the jet velocity field, in which a fast spine is surrounded by a slow layer. Note however that the slower jet component must be relativistic in order to explain the anisotropic radiation of radio galaxy cores (e.g. Capetti & Celotti 1998). The observed flux is dominated by the emission from either the spine or the slower layer, in the case of aligned and misaligned objects, respectively. Interestingly, the existence of velocity structures in the jet has been suggested by various authors (e.g. Laing 1999) in order to explain some radio structures observed in FR I jets. Recently, observational evidence for such a behaviour has been found in 3C 353 (an FR II), M 87, B2 1144+35. We thus considered this hypothesis in the simplest case, i.e. a model with two axisymmetric components having the same intrinsic luminosity, spectrum and emitting volume (see Chiaberge et al. 2000 for details). We found that Lorentz factors of the layer Γlayer  ~  2 can account for the unification of FR I (of the 3CR) with LBL and intermediate luminosity BL Lacs. Instead the debeaming trails for the lowest luminosity HBL do not cross the FR I region in the Lo - Lr plane. While the HBL behavior should be compared with that of radio galaxies with which they share the extended radio power (e.g. those of the B2 catalogue), our simple two-component jet model would not account for the observed properties if the cores of such low-power FR I radio galaxies lied on the extrapolation of the 3CR radio-optical correlation. A possible interpretation is that in such weak sources the radio emitting region is less beamed than the optical one, as could be expected if the jet decelerates after the higher energy emitting zone.