General relativity as a complete theory and its new consequences

Published in: Z.Zakir (2003-2007) Structure of Space-Time and Matter. CTPA, Tashkent. (http://ctpa.theorphys.org)

Centre for Theoretical Physics and Astrophysics 11a, Sayram, Tashkent, 100170 Uzbekistan

Introduction

The conventional treatment of general relativity leads to the intrinsic incompleteness of the theory because of the appearance of horizons and singularities in the black holes and cosmology. Is this a necessary consequence of the first principles of the theory or it can be reformulated as a complete one by the preserving of its experimentally checked principles?

Now the predicted black holes do not convincingly revealed, and only some massive compact objects have been interpreted as the black holes. At the same time large number of quasars have been discovered with very high redshifts (z  ~  6) which can not be explained in the standard treatment without assumptions about extraordinary masses, luminosities and unusually small sizes and large distances. Why so many difficulties appear in the identification of few candidates to predicted objects, while the objects which difficultly explained in the theory have been so easily discovered by astronomers every week?

In the standard treatments of general relativity main attention has been drawn to the metrics and coordinates as some formal mathematical tools, and little attention has been given to their physical meaning and measurability. In this paper it is argued, that general relativity becomes a complete theory if we use only the results of physically correctly defined extended spatial and temporal coordinates instead of formal variables having a local meaning only.

We shall describe particle's motion in the Schwarzschild field on the hypersurfaces of simultaneity t = const, and show that the static frame is complete, the horizon and singularity can not be formed at any fixed moment of the coordinate time. The correctly interpreted general relativity does not predict the black holes, but it naturally explains quasars with the arbitrary high redshifts as relativistic stars or galaxy nuclei with ordinary masses, luminosities, sizes and distances.

It will be shown that general relativity does not contain also the cosmological singularity and leads to the consistent cosmological models. Another consequence of the proposed treatment is that the regularizations of loop divergencies at the renormalization in quantum field theory can be derived as the consequences of general relativity requirements at small distances.

In the paper the corrected version of the new formulation is presented, the preliminary properties of which has been considered in the paper [\cite=Za1]. In a final form the new treatment is presented in [\cite=Za3].

Gravitational time dilation in a static field

In a curved spacetime arbitrary curvilinear coordinate systems can be used and the spacetime interval ds2 is invariant under the general coordinate transformations. But from a physical point of view a definite coordinate system has a meaning only after the describing the behavior of rods and clocks on the extended physical frame, on the basis of which these coordinates can be measured.

In flat spacetime the Minkowski line element between two events in the spherical coordinates has the form :

[formula]

where dΩ2 = dθ2  +   sin 2θdφ2 is the line element on 2-sphere.

At finite distances from the sperically symmetric source of the gravitational field the line element on a local frame has the same form:

[formula]

where dτ is measured by the local (resting) standard clocks, [formula] is measured by the radially oriented local standard rods.

We can introduce, in addition to the local standard rods and clocks, the non-standard ones with appropriately lenghened radial rods and faster going (coordinate) clocks so, that the extended radial coordinate axis coincides with the flat space case, and all coordinate clocks are going synchronously.

Then the line element in the static field can be expressed across the such constructed flat spacetime frame coordinates (t,r,θ,φ) as:

[formula]

where:

[formula]

We see that due to the special symmetries of the system, here only the temporal and radial components of the metric g00(r) and g11(r) describe the physical effects of the gravitational field. For the Schwarzschild solution htere are the time dilation dτ  =  γ1 / 2dt and the contraction of the radial rods dr = γ- 1 / 2dr, where γ = 1 - rg / r. Here rg = 2GM is the gravitational radius, G is the Newton constant, and M is mass of the source.

In the static gravitational field we have the conserved energy of the particle E which is equal to the rest energy E0 = m0 at the falling of a particle rested at the spatial infinity (r  →    ∞  ) and it can be written as:

[formula]

Here [formula] is the local velocity and for this case it is equal to:

[formula]

The velocities of rods and clocks of the freely falling from the spatial infinity local frames increase at lower r with respect to the local static frames. The rods and clocks of the falling frames contain the Lorentz contraction and dilation with respect to the static frame ones.

From the previous energy conservation condition, an equation of motion for the falling particle in terms of distant frame time t can be obtained as:

[formula]

where β = r / rg . This coordinate time interval is divergent if lower limit tends to the gravitational radius r0  →  rg. The coordinate time interval for the radially falling photons also is divergent at r0  →  rg.

The structure of unstable relativistic stars

In the black hole approach the strong gravitational time dilation and large radial contraction effects have been considered as relative and pure coordinate effects which can be simply excluded by some coordinate transformations. Then the worldlines of particles have been described in terms of the proper times or other parametrizations not containing singularities at the gravitational radius. However, this approach has been based on the hypothesis that there exist the souces the surface radii of which are less than their gravitational radii R < rg. Only at this assumption one can study the test particles approaching or even crossing the gravitational radius of the source.

Let us consider a thin spherical dust shell the particles of which freely fall radially. In this case any test particle falls in an effective static field, outside the shell the metrics is the Schwarzschild metric while the inside metric is flat one (where a constant time dilation coefficient is the same as on the shell). Due to the gravitational time dilation and radial contractions, on any hypersurface of simultaneity t = const the dust shell's radius exceeds the gravitational radius R > rg, and only at t  →    ∞   the shell approaches R  →  rg. Inside the shell the metric remain as a constant and regular one at any fixed moment of the coordinate time without the horizon and gravitational singularity.

We also can consider a spherical dust cloud as a set of enclosed dust shells. Any shell increases the time dilation coefficient of inner and oter shells to a finite value and for any shell this coefficient remains finite. Therefore, the contracting dust cloud becomes inhomogeneously frozed with a maximal time dilation at the centre and minimal at the surface.

Therefore, the key assumption of the black hole approach is in fact unphysical and can not be realized in the framework of general relativity.

Thus, we can conclude, that:

1) the worldlines of particles and photons in the static field are continuous and timelike on any hypersurface t = const and in that sence the Schwarzschild's frame is complete;

2) The horizon and singularity do not appear in general relativity at the appropriate definition of the spacetime observables on the such hypesurfaces.

3) For the unstable compact relativistic stars general relativity describes on the hypersurfaces t = const as the inhomogeneously frozen and very slowly contracting stars having some internal structure and where the strong time dilation and radial contraction effects play the role of stabilizing factors.

Hierarchy of compact relativistic stars

The compact frozen stars with the surface radius R near rg have a finite volume and a finite density. Hence, the hierarchy of supercompact stars at ordinary and extraordinary physical states of matter do not stop on neutron star's level, but it should be continued to more dense physical states. For the stars with masses more than the critical mass of neutron star's stability [formula] a family of stable states can appears.

The first one is the family of heavy baryon stars, containing baryonic resonances (Λ,Σ,Ξ,Δ). The multiquark hadron stars and quark stars, which appear after the quark-hadron phase transition, also can be considered.

Some of the observing candidates to black holes can be one of above mentioned type stars. The searches of the supermassive stars containing subquarks or other types of substituents of quarks and leptons (subquark stars), heavy particles of the grand unification also become meaningful search programs without any gravitational restrictions.

Thus, the theory of quasars and other relativistic stars or relativistic galactic nuclei can be consistently constructed on the basis of general relativity.

Quasars in astrophysics are defined as the point sources of emission with high redshifts of their spectral lines. Since a stellar redshift in black hole treatments of general relativity has been restricted at z < 0.2 with maximal value for the neutron stars, the standard interpretation of quasar's high redshift mechanism has been restricted by the cosmological Doppler redshift only. In this interpretation the luminosities of quasars, which sizes are very small with respect to the galaxies ( < 1ps), nevertheless, 103  ÷  105 times exceed the luminosities of galaxies. The distances then must be (0.1  ÷  5)  ×  109ps. Many quasars have broad emission lines and some of them have also absorption lines with sufficiently less values of redshifts than the emission lines of the same quasar. At the such extraordinary parameters some of quasars are variable, and their luminosity changes 2  ÷  3 times during very short times.

Two statements of the new theory of relativistic stars, the first that no collapse and the superdense matter forms new types of stars and galactic nuclei, and the second that no restrictions for the stellar and extragalactic objects redshifts, lead to the new general relativistic theory of quasars as the relativistic galactic nuclei, and for some of them as the compact stars in the Milky Way.

A part of redshifts of quasars, therefore, contains the gravitational redshift, since they are compact objects having a surface near the gravitational radius. In the case of galactic nuclei the cosmological Doppler redshift must be separated from the total redshift by means some astrophysical methods. If the gravitational part of the redshift can be determined independently, then we can separate the Doppler part and determine true distances up to the quasars. But in both cases the distances, luminosities and masses of extragalactic quasars become sufficiently less than modern standard estimations and they become normal with respect to the analogous parameters of galactic nuclei.

The redshift differences between the absorption and emission lines may be explained partly by the existence of absorbing layers (photosphere) near the surfaces of the quasars. Really, small difference of radii (few percent from rg) between layers leads to large redshift differences (Δz  ~  0.1  ÷  1.0).

Up to now quasars have been considered only as the extragalactic large distance and very massive ([formula]) objects due to the Doppler shift explanation of their redshifts. If we treat the redshift partly as the gravitational one, then for some of quasars main part of the observed redshift may has the gravitational origin. The such quasars may be in the local group of galaxies and here we can obtain a useful information about the dynamics and the structure of quasars, and obviously, about the galaxies evolution.

A new prediction of the present theory of quasars, which can be checked by observations, is that for some of objects, catalogued as quasars, the total redshift may be only the gravitational redshift, and that in the Milky Way and neighbor galaxies the stellar mass quasars may exist as the relativistic stars with high gravitational redshifts. The particle content of such stellar quasars is not sufficient for our purposes in this paper since the same value of redshift may be in the case of various relativistic stars with different particles (neutrons, hyperons, quarks) and masses (5  ÷  100 [formula]). The searches of such quasars in the Galaxy, or identification of some known quasars (in the equatorial zone of the Galaxy) as the relativistic stars will be very important for verification of the general relativistic theory of stellar structures.

Some details of the proposed theory of quasars will be described in the paper [\cite=Za2].

Relativistic cosmology without singularity

Let us consider Einstein's D = 3 sphere embedded into D = 4 space as a hypersurface. Let this 3-sphere contains a homogeneous dust matter at the radial distance a from the center of gravity in 4-dimensional space with respect to which the spherical symmetry is defined.

The dust matter has a static gravitational field and the 5D line element in this case is:

[formula]

where the line element in the 3-sphere is:

[formula]

The solutions of the 5D Einstein equations can be directly obtained with the result:

[formula]

where α is a gravitational radius of the static field in 4-dimensional space. Then the final form of the line element is:

[formula]

The conserved energy for the freely falling from the spatial infinity (or outfalling from the center) thin 3-spherical dust shell is:

[formula]

Therefore, exactly same as in the case of Schwarzschild field in the previous sections, we can use this energy conservation condition for the determining of a critical velocity vc:

[formula]

The Universe can be considered as D = 3 spherical dust shell in D = 4 space which radially outfalls in the own gravitational field. The gravitational radius α is approximately equals to the radius of the Universe at the Big Bang when the matter has been gravitationally frozen in terms of the present time scale, while it was very hot in terms of the local proper times. Then the Big Bang can be explained as the result of a phase transition with sufficient energy liberation for the refrozing of the Universe.

The velocity vc of the falling and expansion of the sample particles which start falling from the infinity is a critical velocity. If the present velocity of expansion v(a) less than the critical velocity v(a) < vc, we have a closed model and the expansion will stops at a finite radius am and then will falls again.

We see that this model is a new dynamical version of the Einstein-Friedman cosmological models without the problems with the singularity, and with a natural mechanism for oscillations.

In this model a new type of the cosmological redshift appear due to a 4-dimensional gravitational potential difference in moments t0 when a photon has been emitted and at moment t1 when it has been received:

[formula]

This additional gravitational redshift can seriously modify the Doppler redshift value of z at large distances and at z > 1. Particularly, taking into account this effect the volume of the Universe can be decreased and a density of matter can be increased which can partly solves the dark matter and dark energy problems.

Thus, in the considered model main cosmological problems can be naturally solved or can be better understood on the basis of the first principles of general relativity without additional hypothesis. More detail discussion will be presented in the forthcoming publications.

The thick strings and membranes

The standard quantum field theory describe on a continual spacetime the local interactions of point particles, but it leads to the infinities of the values of physical observables. A more successful paradigm which is very popular at last time based on the introduction of nonlocal fundamental objects with local interactions, such as strings and branes. But this paradigm also contains the intrinsic contradictions since by excluding one class of infinities, it, nevertheless, does not lead to a finite theory. There appear another type infinities in the form of the new singularities which appear due to the black hole type solutions.

In the standard treatment of general relativity a finite mass point particle live inside of own gravitational radius and therefore, each point particle must be really a microscopic black hole . This is inessential for the perturbative quantum field theory since this theory does not pretend to the exact and correct description of gravitational degrees of freedom.

In the cases of strings and branes the situation with the such finite gravitational thicknesses of the fundamental objects is most serious because of this models pretend to the exact taking into account of the classical and quantum properties of gravitation. The finiteness of variables and the locality of interactions can not be preserved in the string-brane paradigm due to the Troyan Horse of gravitation in form of the black hole solutions with horizons and intrinsic singularities.

The presented new treatment of compact relativistic sources shows that in general relativity there no point sources and the size of any compact source for the distant observer can not be less than its gravitational radius. Therefore, the theories of strings and branes should be reformulated by excluding the such idealised objects as infinitely thin strings and menbranes. If the such reformulation is impossible, these models should be considered as incompatible with the relativistic causality.

Gravitational regularization of quantized fields

Let us consider the gravitational effects at high energy fluctuations at small distances in the loop diagrams of quantum field theory.

A size of localization region of ultrarelativistic quantum particle is inverse proportional to the energy ΔE of quantum fluctuations Δx  ~  ΔE, while a gravitational radius rg = 2GΔE, corresponding to the such energy localization, is proportional to that energy. These two curves for the energy dependence intersect at the Planck length lpl and at the Planck energy Epl. Before the Planck length (Δx > lp) the wave lengths of quantum fluctuations of particles exceed the gravitational radii of particles (Δx > lp > rg). Here the standard quantum field theory works successfully without the gravitational corrections.

If we consider the quantum fluctuations with the size of localization less than Planck length Δx < lp and with the energy ΔE > Epl, here the situation becomes different since rg > lp  >  Δx and here the gravitational effects dominate.

In the new treatment, a spatial radial distance |x1 - x2|  =  ρ between two particles in the loop diagram should be more than the gravitational radius rg of the total energy of this system of particles. Therefore, the radial distance between the virtual particles can be represented as ρ  =  ρg + rg. This means that we can simply to shift lower limits of radial integrations in space-time integrals from ρ = 0 to ρ = rg. As the result, we have a simple cutting at rg of the radial integrals of loop amplitudes which naturally excludes the divergencies for the observables.

We can illustrate this procedure in a simple one loop self energy diagram. Let the momentum of electron at initial moment of the coordinate time is p, at intermediate moment is q and a momentum of virtual photon is k. The self energy amplitude contains integrals:

[formula]

Due to the gravitational effects and the radial integration over ρg, lower limit in the radial integrations around the centre of inertia of the state is equa to rg  ~  1 / ΔEk + q and the self energy is finite if we take the simlest case rg  ~  lp:

[formula]

In quantum electrodynamics the such corrections not so great in comparison with the physical values of the parameters. For example, the second order corrections to the self energy and the charge of electron after the such cutting at rg = lp are approximately 10% from the physical mass m and the charge e of electron.

If we want deal with δ-functions for simplicity, we can write the conventional divergent self energy integrals, but then we must subtract the unphysical part of the integrals in the interval (0,rg):

[formula]

We see that this is exactly the regularization procedure at the renormalization. Therefore, we can conclude, that the standard regularizations was the methods allowing one to take into account the natural gravitational regularization at high energy fluctuations at small distances.

Conclusion

Schwarzschild's field in terms of the extended physical coordinates becomes simple and normal from the point of view of the traditional physics. The horizon and central singularity do not exist on the global hypersurfaces of simultaneity t = const where the set of sinchronized coordinate clocks allows one to count time for any event. Strong gravitational time dilation effects lead to the freezing of all processes in the contracting compact objects and play the role of a stabilization factor.

General relativity in combination with particle physics predicts new families of relativistic stars and quasars instead of black holes. The lack of the initial cosmological singularity leads to the consistent cosmological models. Taking into account the strong time dilation effects, solves also the problem of infinities in quantum field theory.

Appendix. A simple derivation of general relativistic effects

In the first order the relativistic corrections to the Newtonian gravity formulas can be obtained by means of a simple rule, that a relativistic source acts to the particle at r (in the first order) as a Newtonian source acts to this particle at r - rg.

As an example let us consider the perihelion shift which can be represented in the first order as the such effective radial shift in the Newtonian formulas. For a planet at the orbit r we replace in the Newtonian formulas r to r - rg, and then directly obtain Einstein's formula for the perihelion shift per period:

[formula]

For the elliptic orbit with the focal parameter L this leads to:

[formula]