The study of resonant variability observed in the massive LMC system BI 108

Photometric properties of the system

An object LMC SC9-127519 was discovered as a variable star with unique photometric properties during our multiperiodicity search in the OGLE-II database (Szymaski, 2005). Independently this object was announced as two binary systems in 3:2 resonance by Ofir (2008). With the coordinates, the magnitude (V=13.3) and the colour (B-V=-0.142), we identified object as BI 108 in the list of Brunet et al. (1975), for which they give a spectral type of B1-2. Schmidt-Kaler et al. (1999) list B1:II: for the same object. Probably BI 108 is one of the brightest member of a young open cluster, NGC 1881. The OGLE-II data spans almost four years. A time series analysis returns two periods. Of these two periods the stronger one (P1=3.57793 d), with a peak-to-peak amplitude of about 0.18 mag, is clearly of a double wave nature. A light curve of such that particular appearance can, with little doubt, be attributed to an eclipsing binary nature (Fig. 1). The weaker period, with about 0.05 mag peak-to-peak, has the value of P2=5.36654 d. Within the uncertainties this is exactly 3/2 of the stronger period. The second light curve is not sinusoidal (Fig. 1). An analysis of the photometric variability allows two options, including P2 or P2/2, and 3:2 or 3:4 resonance values, respectively. With the MACHO data (ID 79.5378.25) we were able to confirm both periodicities with the same amplitudes in three bands and their long term coherence. Moreover both periods have exactly the same moment of the minimum. It is an additional constraint difficult to explain in the model. Such a clearly resonant and long-term stable period relation is not known for any other early type variable star.

Preliminary spectroscopic results

The immediate goal of our follow-up program was to confirm the assumption of an eclipsing binary for P1 period, and clarify the nature of the period with smaller amplitude, which could be either P2 in case an ellipsoidal light curve arising from a multiple co-planar system, or twice shorter in case of a single wave, e.g. tidally forced pulsation. These processes have their own, distinct spectroscopic signatures revealed in the radial velocity and line shape changes. Ten epochs spectroscopic observations were carried out at ESO VLT/UVES. The system has SB2 nature and contains two similar components with spectral features of B1 II/Ib stars. But surprisingly an orbital period seems to be P2. We do not find modulation of the radial velocities with P1 period and moreover we do not see any signature of the third component in the system. This result does not support our predictions. Only evidence of the shorter variability is the H and He I profile variability. When both phases are close to quadrature the system appears as SB2 with almost identical lines but changes relative depth when the shorter cycle is close to minimum. This seems to follow a shorter photometric cycle and strongly suggest a variability of one (less massive) component. It could be an effect of unusual eclipses or rotational modulation. But our few spectral observations do not allow to test these hypotheses, and so far the nature of the phenomena observed in the BI 108 remains unknown.