Introduction

In recent years, hundred-hertz QPOs have been observed in several black hole X-ray binaries with RXTE satellite. These high-frequency QPOs are probably similar to the kilohertz QPOs observed frequently in a dozen neutron star low-mass X-ray binaries. However, the high frequency QPOs in two Galactic microquasars, GRO J1655-40 and GRS 1915+105, are very stable in frequency at 300 Hz and 67 Hz respectively (Morgan, Remillard & Greiner 1997; Remillard et al. 1999). These stable QPOs have also very low fractional rms amplitude (~  1%). Theoretical models involving frame-dragging (Cui, Zhang & Chen 1998), diskoseismic g-mode (Nowak et al. 1997), and periastro precession (Stella, Vietri & Morsink 1999) have been proposed to explain these stable QPOs. But the origin of them is still uncertain.

Recently Psaltis & Norman (2000; hearafter PN) suggested that the observed QPOs in X-ray binaries may be related to the strong resonances peaked at some characteristic oscillation frequencies in the inner part of accretion disks. However, they introduced a simplified term for angular momentum transfer and did not discuss the damping and growth rates of oscillation modes. It is also important to check if some of these modes can be trapped in the inner disk and if the low fractional rms amplitude of QPOs observed in two microquasars can be explained by the trapped feature of oscillation modes.

Non-damping Oscillation Modes in Accretion Disk

The basic equations of a geometrically thin accretion disk are the same as those in PN except that the viscosity term in the angular momentum equation is now expressed as: Nφ = (1 / ρr)∂(νρr3dΩ / dr) / ∂r. The viscosity is assumed to be described by the usual α prescription, namely, ν  =  αcsH = αc2s  /  Ω. Like in PN, we consider the general relativistic effects in an approach to specify the the gravitational potential ψ through the dependences of angular velocity (Ω), radial and vertical epicyclic frequencies (κ and [formula]) on the mass, radius and the spin parameter of the central object. We consider small perturbations to all physical quantities in the form of Q = Q0  +  δQei(ωt  -  kr  -  mφ), where k and m are radial and azimuthal wavenumbers. We also assume that the perturbations do not alter the local sound speed and the disk is isothermal in the vertical direction. Under the local approximation kr >  > 1, we can obtain four perturbed equations and derive the dispersion relation as

[formula]

Conclusion

RXTE observations on GRO J1655-40 have shown 300 Hz QPOs with ~  1% rms magnitude. If this stable QPO originates from the trapped disk oscillations, from Figures 1 and 2 we see that it may be explained by either the lower-frequency acoustic mode in the case of m = 1 and n = 0 or the lower-frequency corrugation mode in the case of m = n = 1 and a*  ~  0.9. However, the rapidly spinning black hole is more favored to explain the high QPO frequency. The unambiguous determinations of the inner disk radius and the black hole spin are still needed to confirm this explanation. Further studies on the origin of low-frequency QPOs and their correlation with high-frequency QPOs, as well as the correlation between spectral and temporal properties, will help us to understand more clearly the origin of stable QPOs in microquasars.