Simulation tool of a Supernova search with VST

Introduction

Supernovae explosion rates provide important information on the evolutionary scenario of SN progenitors, the star formation history of the Universe and ISM physic (See Refs , , , , , ). In recent years many SN surveys have been conducted aimed to the detection of SN candidates to measure the SN rates as function of redshift. Most of them are designed to search SNe for their use as cosmological probes (Refs , , ) and, as a consequence, they are strongly biased towards type Ia and they provide no information on the evolution of core-collapse SN rates. Recently we completed the first phase of a long term project aimed to measure the rate at intermediate redshift for all SN types (Ref ) which allow to derive the first estimate of the core-collapse SNe rate at redshift z  ~  0.3. The next step we have proposed is to perform a more efficient search at VST and to optimize the search strategy we have written a simulation tool able to predict the numbers of SNe of different types which are aspected to be discover in a magnitude-limited survey.

Simulation Tool

Our simulation is based on several assumptions: 1) galaxy luminosity density and rate evolution with redshift are described by a power law (see Ref  ); 2) the geometry of Universe is flat with H0 = 75kms- 1, ΩM = 0.3 (see Ref  ); 3) the light curves for different SNe types in the SN rest frame do not change with redshift. We have created a catalogue of SN spectra extended from the UV to the infrared using spectra taken from IUE, HST and Asiago archives. The first step has been to join the different spectral ranges obtaining homogeneus, extended spectra. With redshift the observed SNe spectrum is stretched and shifted toward longer wavelengths and the SN apparent magnitude is different from that measured in the SN rest frame. Using our spectral library we estimated the K-correction as a function of redshift for different SN types and filters combination. In particular we have estimated K-correction for the Sloan filter set. Besides we have determined the optimal filter band to maximize the number of detectable SNe. Finally, using the control time method, we have determined the temporal interval between observations which optimize the search efficiency.

Conclusions

We have computed the expected SN counts as a function of redshift by summing the contribution of individual SN types. The number of SNe expected during the three years of our VST SN search is ~  300, a good statistics to improve the SN rate. Because of the lack of UV SN observations at high redshift our K-correction estimates are uncertain. On the other hand at this distance optical search should be replaced by infrared ones because the optical emission of high redshift SNe is very low. Another useful result is, at different redshift, the limit on the frequency of observations over which there is no gain as far as concern the number of SN detection. We aim to extend the scope of our simulation tool to the planning of SN search with a generic observing facilities. In particular we are interested to the simulation of a SN search with the new wide field infrared facility VISTA.