The modern instrumentation of large telescopes like large mosaics of CCD chips, massive multi-object spectrographs with thousands of optical fibers or microlenses in Integral Field Units (IFU) as well as fast radio correlators mixing inputs of tens of antennas have been producing terabytes of raw data per night and for their reduction a grids of supercomputers are needed. For example the future all sky survey LSST will yield 30TB od raw data every night requiring for the reduction of data the processing power about 400 TFLOPs (Ivezi et al. 2011).

The current growth of astronomical data in large archives has been rising exponentially with the doubling constant less than 6-9 months. It is much steeper that the famous Moore's law of technology advances which predicts the doubling time of computer resources about 18 month (Quinn et al. 2004, Quinn 2007).

Astronomy is just facing the avalanche of data that no-one can process and exploit in full. It is clear that such data cannot be processed and analysed in a classical manner on local desktop and the concept of remote processing has to be introduced.

The promising solution of handling this data deluge is the implementation of service oriented architecture moving the burden of data processing, pre-analysis and searching towards the high performance well equipped data centres.

The key role in this effort plays the concept of Virtual Observatory, whose goal is to provide standards describing all astronomical resources worldwide and to enable the standardized discovery and access to these collections as well as powerful tools for scientific analysis and visualisation.

As the VO mostly provides access to final science-ready data, the VO data provider has to make the final calibrated data VO-compatible. This requires creation of a set of metadata (for curation, provenance and characterization) and preparation of access interface in accordance with appropriate VO standard protocols.

Most of the highly acknowledged astronomical services like Vizier, Simbad, NED or tools as Aladin are the practical examples of VO technology in everyday use. All the complexity of replicated database engines, XML processors, data retrieval protocols as well as distributed grids of supercomputers providing powerful services is hidden under the hood of a simple web-based form delivering complex tables, images, previews, graphs just on the button click.

The VO development and preparation of standards is coordinated by the International Virtual Observatory Alliance (IVOA) currently having 17 national and 2 multinational (ESA and ESO) members. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) is promoting the VO through its Commission 5 and dedicated VO working group.

The key task of IVOA is the design of global standards (data models, data formats, protocols) for the whole VO infrastructure reflecting the needs and priorities of different astronomical communities and projects. There is also an Astronet strategic plan for European astronomy created by several funding agencies to establish a comprehensive long-term planning for the development of European astronomy - The Infrastructure Roadmap. It emphasises the role of VO for future astronomers and requires all new projects data to be VO-compliant.

Although very sophisticated most of current archives are just isolated islands of information with unique structure, data formats and access rules (including specific search engine). Even if the questions asked are simple the returned data have different scales, orientation, astrometric accuracy as well as coordinate system.

Thus the key issue for success of interoperability of distinct services is the strict standardization of data format of data content. The astronomy has an advantage of using the same format -- FITS -- of all astronomical frames for decades. The global interoperability of VO infrastructure is based on several standardized components:

The bunch of data (e.g. columns of numbers) are not exploitable without metadata (i.e. labels of columns and README explaining the labels). The metadata are describing the same physical variables with the same term despite the original label used in the given table. The same with units. The important role play here the controlled semantic vocabulary of Unified Content Descriptors (UCD).

This together with the standardized access protocols allow to design clients which can query and retrieve data from all VO-compatible servers at once. Standard data format in VO, the VOTable, is a XML standard allowing full serialization (first are sent metadata and than follows a stream of numbers) and embedded hyperlinks for real data contents (e.g. URL to FITS on remote servers).

All the available astronomical knowledge about acquisition process, observing conditions as well as the whole processing and reduction should be included in the self-describing part of VOTable metadata (called provenance) together with all proper credits and citations (called curation metadata).

All the physical properties of observation should be placed in other part of meta-data called characterisation which should describe all the relevant information about spatial, temporal and spectral coverage, resolution, position, exposure length, filters etc.

The worldwide knowledge about the particular VO resource requires the global distributed database similar to Internet Domain Name Service (DNS). So all VO resources (catalogues, archives, services) have to be registered in one of the VO Registries. The registry records are encoded in XML. Every VO resource has the unique identifier looking like URL but instead of +http://+ having the prefix +ivo://+, which is considered to be compulsory for referring to datasets in some journals.

All the information describing the nature of the data, parameters, characterization or even references and credits put in one registration server are being regularly harvested by all VO registries, so every desktop client may have the fresh list of everything available in VO.

The transparent access of data from VO servers is accomplished using a number of strictly controlled protocols. Among the most commonly used belong:

The queries are written using the specific superset of SQL, called ADQL (Astronomical Data Query Language) with operators allowing selection of objects in sub-region of any geometrical shape on the sky or the XMATCH operator allowing to decide the probability of match of two sets of objects in two catalogues with different error box (called cross-matching of catalogues).

The interaction of VO infrastructure with end user (scientist) is provided by a number of VO-compatible applications. Most of them are desktop clients (written in the multi-platform manner -- in Java or Python) There are general tools for work with multidimensional data sets -- VOPlot or TOPCAT, celestial atlases for showing images over-plotted with catalogue data -- Aladin or VIRGO, as well as applications for specific operations on spectra -- SPLAT, VOSpec and SpecView. The regularly updated list of all VO applications is maintained at EURO-VO Software page.

The so far tedious but very important astronomical technique is the determination of spectral energy distribution (SED), which helps to reveal the physical nature of the astronomical object. The VO technology can help a lot in an aggregation of observed data and theoretical models. Building of SEDs in VO consists of collecting the scattered photometric data, their transformation into common filter system (using the database of different filter transmission curves) and fitting theoretical model obtained as well from VO databases of model spectra.

One recent application for building SEDs is VAO Iris incorporating the advanced package for fitting spectra Sherpa. Some more complicated tools are being built as web services or web applications (with query forms etc.). The example of very usefull web-based application is Virtual Observatory SED Analyzer (VOSA).

As every application is written by different developers having in mind specific type of scientific analysis, there does not exist any single complex all-purpose VO tool. Instead of this, in the spirit of UNIX thinking, the isolated applications have common interoperability interface using the Simple Application Messaging Protocol (SAMP). VO applications supporting SAMP can exchange their data (VOTables, spectra, images) with other SAMP-compatible application. This allows (together with command scripting) the building of complex processing and analysing workflows by chaining the VO applications.

The key advantage of maintaining VO infrastructure is the new type of science called VO-science. The huge data-mining potential and multi-wavelength nature of VO infrastructure allows to tackle problems not feasible by any other means (e.g. search of rare events, classes of objects, pan-spectral research from gamma to radio etc.) There is already number of referred articles using VO in astronomical research. Current list of VO-based papers is maintained at EURO-VO web.

An example of VO power is the study of rare objects. In the 2005 VO Science demonstration were found 100 new candidate in transition phase from AGB star to planetary nebulae using VO methodology in addition to 200 already known so far (Tsalmantza et al. 2006). Another example is the discovery of a new brown dwarfs by using VO tools to cross-match two large catalogues. VO enabled the discovery of extremely bright white subdwarf (Caballero & Solano 2007) and many other extreme objects.

Success story of using complex VO technology (spectral fitting, photometric search, catalogues cross-matching) and data mining technology to yield new scientific results not achievable by any classic method (due to its huge scale) were justified by Chilingarian et al. (2009).

Not only observational astronomy is producing large data volumes. The same data format and protocols are used for access to theoretical spectra or artificial images of simulated stellar clusters, models of stellar atmospheres, isochrones in stellar evolution models or to results of simulations of galaxy collisions or even evolution of all Universe.

The metadata and query parameters are model specific (e.g. Teff, log g), but the result is output as VOTable. Special data and metadata access protocols have been used and new are still suggested in the IVOA. The specific data model and database structures called SimDB are used as the backbone of large simulation projects as is the Interstellar Media Platform, part of which is the code for computation of physical parameters in Photo-Dissociation Regions (PDR). The large EU-FP7 project Virtual Atomic and Molecular Data Centre will use the VO infrastructure for accessing distributed atomic and molecular databases as well as SLAP protocol for client access.

There is a number of spectroscopic techniques requiring processing of large amount of spectra of the similar size and resolution to get the physical information about single object. We try to identify the ones, where the VO technology could help to reduce the tedious work and speed up the processing. More detailed description of various spectroscopic techniques in VO is given in Skoda (2008) and Skoda (2009a,b).

Accomplishing the multi-spectral analysis in VO environment may benefit from automatic aggregation of distributed archive resources, seamless on-the-fly data conversion, common interoperability of all tools and powerful graphical visualisation of measured and derived quantities.

A lot of the information about the behaviour of astronomical objects can be estimated just by a visual inspection of a spectrum (spectral type, peculiarity, emission) or a time series of spectra (pulsations, binarity). The basic method is the over-plotting of many spectra in the same units and scale. It may be very efficient with VO-enabled tools obtaining the number of spectra cached immediately from VO spectral servers with SSAP. There are many possibilities of plots. Among the most common belong:

The high resolution spectra with high SNR may reveal on some objects small variations of the profile of spectral lines. The study of LPV requires many (even hundreds) of spectra to be over-plotted with the additional vertical offset (corresponding to time of observation or just a convenient constant) to see the changes easily. Sometimes the animation of changes in individual spectral line is very impressive. Such a plot is helpful in asteroseismology or for estimating changes in stellar winds.

It is sometimes called the grey representation or trailed spectrum. The basic idea is to find the small time-dependent deviations of individual line profiles from some average. The recipe is simple. First the average of many high dispersion high SNR spectra (with removal of outliers) is prepared (called template spectrum). Then each individual spectrum in time series is either divided by the template (quotient spectrum) or the template is subtracted from it (the differential spectrum). The group of similar resulting intensities is given the same colour or level of gray. Examples may be found in de Jong et al. (1999) or Maintz (2003).

For the complex techniques given below, a lot of additional information is required in addition to spectral data. Programs require complicated configuration files in given format and some interactive trials to find the best results using the output from recent run as input to the next one. They are written often in FORTRAN without graphical interface and often without the plotting capabilities. They are designed for batch runs driven by parameter files. The VO tools can help to collect (aggregate) the required spectra and preselect them (in order to remove bad quality data, select given time or spectral range or to isolate interesting spectral features) before entering the specific processing, but they can help in accessing the databases of theoretical models as well.

It was discovered by Vogt & Penrod (1983a) as a method allowing the surface mapping of stellar spots. First test were done on stars of RS CVn type and on ζ Oph (Vogt & Penrod 1983b). The method works well on rapid rotators and needs a high resolution spectra with very high SNR (300-500). Tho whole rotational period should be covered well, better several times. When all the requirements are met, the map of surface features (spots, nodes of non radial pulsations) is obtained with very high accuracy. A recent application of this technique on ζ And is given by Korhonen et al. (2010).

It was introduced by Marsh & Horne (1988) for mapping the distribution of emitting circumstellar matter in binary system. One of the successful applications gave a picture of accretion jets in Algols (Richards 2004). It uses trailed spectrum in velocity scale. The result is 2D image in velocity space. The transformation of radial velocity space to coordinate space is ambiguous, which causes problems in interpretation of Doppler tomograms.

Quite complicated processing of spectra is required for study of stellar magnetic fields. The estimation of magnetic field from polarimetry using the Zeeman effect involves the processing of long series of homogeneous spectra to be accomplished in parallel with extreme precision and requires the information from synthetic models (simulation of Stokes parameters on simulated magnetic stars) The nice example is the model of II Peg by Carroll et al. (2007).

This method allows to separate the spectra of individual stars in binary or multiple systems and simultaneously to find orbital parameters of the system, even in case of heavy blending of lines. It supposes the changes in line profile are caused mainly by combination of Doppler shifted components. The best solution of orbital parameters and disentangled line profiles of individual stellar components are found by least square global minimisation. The method also enables to remove the telluric lines with great precision. Although there are several methods of spectra disentangling, the most commonly used is the Fourier space disentangling introduced by Hadrava(1995) in program KOREL with several generalizations of the methodology. The web service VO-KOREL is based on VO technology of Universal Worker Service ( Skoda & Hadrava 2010).

As was said above, the current science is commonly understood to be data-intensive or data-driven. The research in almost all natural sciences is facing the 'data avalanche' represented by exponential growth of information. The effective retrieval of a scientific knowledge from petabyte-scale databases requires the qualitatively new kind of scientific discipline called e-Science, allowing the global collaboration of virtual communities sharing the enormous resources and power of supercomputing grids (Zhao et al. 2008 and Zhang et al. 2008). E-Science is often referred to as the internet-enabled sharing of distributed data, information, computational resources, and team knowledge for the advancement of science. As an example of working e-Science technology in astronomy is given the emerging new kind of astronomical research methodology -- the Astroinformatics.

It is based on systematic application of modern informatics and advanced statistics on huge astronomical data sets. Such an approach, involving the machine learning, classification, clustering and data mining yields the new discoveries and better understanding of nature of astronomical objects. The Astroinformatics is an example of a new science methodology where the new discoveries result often from the searching of outliers in common statistical patterns. It is sometimes presented as new way of doing astronomy (Borne et al. 2009, Ball and Brunner 2010). Examples of successful application of astroinformatics in spectroscopy is the data mining of spectra with lines of given shape (Váný 2011) and the estimation of photometric red shifts (D'Abrusco et al. 2009).

Astronomical spectroscopy uses a wide range of techniques with different level of complexity to achieve its final goal -- to estimate the most precise and reliable information about celestial objects. The large part of spectroscopic analysis today has been accomplished by several independent non VO-compatible legacy packages, where each works with different local files in its own data format. Analysis of large number of spectra is thus very tedious work requiring good data bookkeeping.

Accomplishing the analysis in VO infrastructure may benefit from automatic aggregation of distributed archive resources (e.g. the multispectral research), seamless on-the-fly data conversion, common interoperability of all tools and powerful graphical visualisation of measured and derived quantities.

Combining the VO infrastructure power and the easy and transparent high performance computing on GRID will allow the advanced analysis of large spectral surveys feasible in a reasonable time. The crucial role in understanding the results of such an analysis plays the Astroinformatics as a methodology allowing the extraction of new physical knowledge from astronomical observations, what is the final goal of all scientific effort.

Ball, N. M., and Brunner, R. M. 2010, International, Journal of Modern Physics D 19, 1049 (arXiv:0906.2173v2)

Borne, K., et al. 2009, in Astro2010: The Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey, Position Papers, 6 (arXiv:0909.3892)

Caballero, J. A. & Solano, E. 2007, ApJ. Lett., 665, L151

Carroll, T. A., Kopf et al. 2007, Astronomische Nachrichten, 328, 1043

Chilingarian, I. et-al. 2009, Science, 326, 1379

D'Abrusco, R., Longo, G., and Walton, N.A. 2009, MNRAS, 396, 223 (arXiv:0805.0156)

de Jong, J. A. et al.,1999 A&A, 345, 172

Hadrava, P. 1995, A&AS, 114, 393

Ivezi, . et al. 2011, LSST: From Science Drivers to Reference Design and Anticipated Data Products, arXiv:0805.2366

Korhonen, H. et al. 2010, A&A, 515, A14 (arXiv:1002.4201)

Maintz, M. 2003, Be binary stars with hot, compact companions, PhD. thesis, University of Heidelberg

Marsh, T. R., & Horne, K. 1988, MNRAS, 235, 269

Quinn, P. 2007, Data Intensive Science needs for Australian Astronomy http://astronomyaustralia.org.au/ASTRO-projects-infrastructure.pdf

Quinn, P., Lawrence, A., Hanisch, R. 2004, The Management, Storage and Utilization of Astronomical Data in the 21st Century http://www.ivoa.net/pub/info/OECD-QLH-Final.pdf

Richards, M. T. 2004, Astronomische Nachrichten, 325, 229

koda, P. 2008, in Astronomical Spectroscopy and Virtual Observatory, eds. M. Guainazzi & P. Osuna, ESA, 97

koda, P. 2009a, Mem. Soc. Astron. Ital., 80, 484

koda, P. 2009b, in Multi-wavelength Astronomy and Virtual Observatory, eds. D. Baines & P. Osuna, ESA, 11

koda, P., & Hadrava, P. 2010, in Binaries – Key to Comprehension of the Universe, eds. A. Pra and M. Zejda, ASP Conf. Ser., 435, 71 (arXiv:1003.4801)

Tsalmantza, P. et al. 2006, A&A, 447, 89

Váný, J. 2011, Virtual Observatory and Data Mining, Master thesis, Masaryk University, Brno http://is.muni.cz/th/211665/prif_m/thesis.pdf

Vogt, S. S., & Penrod, G. D. 1983a, PASP, 95, 565

Vogt, S. S., & Penrod, G. D. 1983b, ApJ, 275, 661

Zhang, Y., Zheng, H., & Zhao, Y. 2008, in SPIE Conference Proceedings, 7019, 108

Zhao Y., Raicu, I., & Foster, I. 2008, in IEEE Congress on Services Part I, 467-471 (arXiv:0808.3545)