=

1.25in .125in .25in

Processed and unprocessed ices in circumstellar disks

Introduction

The presence of abundant ices in the interstellar medium has long been firmly established and its connection to the ices present in solar-system comets has been the subject of some discussion. Most of the major constituents of interstellar grain mantles have now been firmly identified, mostly due to the ISO mission and extensive laboratory work. However, only recently have attempts been made to observe the ices in the context of their astrophysical environments. Models indicate that ices may undergo significant transformation when material from a protostellar envelope is incorporated into a disk, either through shock evaporation (Charnley, this volume) and recondensation or through growth of ice mantles under different densities and temperatures than those of the quiescent interstellar medium (e.g. Aikawa et al. 2003).

In this contribution, new direct observations of ices in circumstellar disks are described and compared to ices more likely to be associated with circumstellar envelopes and quiescent molecular cloud material.

Observations of ices in disks

Mid-infrared spectroscopy of nearly edge-on circumstellar disks around young stars probe lines of sight passing through the cold disk mid-planes where ices are expected to exist. As part of a 3-5 μm spectroscopic survey of >   40 young low mass stars (van Dishoeck et al. 2003) a small selection of sources with edge-on disks have been included. Previously, the stretching mode of solid CO at 4.67 μm has been analysed for the low mass edge-on disk sources L1489 IR (Boogert et al. 2002) and CRBR 2422.8-3423 (Thi et al. 2002).

Here we present the results from a search for solid methanol toward these two sources. Methanol (CH3OH) is believed to be formed primarily in the solid state through successive hydrogenation of CO. The formation efficiency of this species is particularly interesting due to its significant role in the gas-phase formation of more complex organic molecules. In Fig. 1, a VLT-ISAAC spectrum of the 3.53 μm region of CRBR 2422.8-3423 is presented showing a non-detection of solid methanol with an upper limit of 6% with respect to water ice. For comparison a strong methanol band observed toward the low mass YSO SVS 4-9 in the Serpens cloud core is shown below (Pontoppidan et al. 2003).

In Fig. 2 the same spectral region is shown of L1489. The band is clearly dominated by the "3.47 μm feature", which is unrelated to the methanol band. The presence of this band makes is difficult to determine the abundance of solid methanol even if the spectrum is of high quality. The spectrum of another low mass source, IRS 42, is also shown as an example of a good upper limit of [formula]% methanol with respect to water ice. We find in general that about 10% of our observed lines of sight contain ice with 20% or more methanol, while only upper limits of 2-10% methanol are available for the rest. This implies that the methanol content of specific grain mantles varies with at least an order of magnitude, depending on the environment. We have not found firm evidence for abundant methanol in the circumstellar disk material observed so far, but our upper limits are still consistent with cometary abundances. If methanol-rich ices from protostellar envelopes have been included in these disks, the methanol must have been diluted or destroyed during the process of disk-formation.