Experimental Conditions for the Gamma Optical Scattering September 1979

The interaction of gamma-ray photons with a nucleus, mediated by an electromagnetic field, was investigated in our paper, The Tuning of γ-Ray Processes with High Power Optical Radiation. In that paper little attention was given to the absolute location of the energy levels of the nuclei: it was rather a discussion of the resonance of the gamma ray energy and of the electromagnetic energy to the nuclear transition energy, where the energy of the gamma ray was considered as a parameter.

In fact, there is a close relationship between the energy of the gamma ray from the nucleus in the source and the transition energy of the nucleus in the absorber. The positions of the energy levels of a free nucleus are affected by the interaction with the electric and magnetic fields in which the nucleus is immersed. These fields can be created by external charge distributions or by atomic electrons. For example, the magnetic dipole interaction arises if an inner unpaired electron polarises the electron configuration, so that there is a difference in the energies corresponding to the various orientations of the nuclear magnetic moment, which is of the order of 10- 5 eV. The electric quadrupole interaction appears for ellipsoidal nuclei, which have a dependence of their energy on the orientation in the spatially varying electric fields created by a non-spherical charge distribution. This interaction is again in the order of 10- 5 eV. The isomeric monopole interaction arises from the dependence of the interaction energy between the external electronic charge and the nucleus on the nuclear radius, which is different for the ground and the excited state. The isomeric energy of interaction is of about 10- 7 eV.

The hyperfine interaction mentioned above produce either splittings, or shifts, of the levels. The binding of the nuclei in a lattice eliminates the Doppler and the recoil effects, but, as the chemical composition of the source and of the absorber is not generally the same, the internal fields will be different, and the emission and absorption lines will not overlap. We proposed in our previous papers to compensate this detuning by an applied electromagnetic field of appropriate energy. Since 1 eV corresponds to 2.41  ×  1014 Hz, the magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole spilttings are compensated by fields of frequencies in the range of several GHz, while the isomeric monopole shift is compensated by frequencies in the range of 10 Mz.

As a matter of fact, the magnetic hyperfine interaction can be seen directly by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance techniques, the electric quadrupole interaction can be measured by Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance techniques, and the monopole interaction usually called the isomer shift is specific to the Mössbauer technique. Of course, each of these have their own limits of applicability, and a new technique may be efficient where the existing ones are not. But the main interest in the Gamma-Optical technique is to obtain experimental evidence for the nuclear Raman scatterings which represents a step toward tunable sources of γ radiation, and a possible way to the Gamma RayLaser.

The results of our paper, The Tuning of the γ-Ray Processes , was that the ratio B of the cross section of the enhanced scattering, σ(2), to the single-photon, Breit-Wigner, cross section, σ(1), is, for transitions mediated by the magnetic sublevels, proportional to the density of the energy flux, Φ2, of the electromagnetic field, divided by the square of the frequency ω2,

[formula]

It was also shown that the ratio, Z, of the gamma-optical cross section, σ(2), to the off-resonance, single-photon cross section, σ(1)±  ω2, is proportional to the energy flux, Φ2, divided by the square of the width, Γ, of the level,

[formula]

The dependence 1 / ω22 of the two-photon cross section is valid with unsplit, Lorentzian profiles of the lines. The preparation of samples which provide such lines is certainly possible, by using lattices of appropriate chemical composition and internal symmetry. On the other hand, the internal fields, or applied external fields, produce splittings of the energy levels, and the 1 / ω22 dependence of the two-photon cross section is valid only for energies ω2 larger than the splitting. Below that limit, the cross section becomes independent of the frequency ω2 of the electromagnetic field.

The Φ2 dependence of the gamma-optical cross section is valid if the power broadening of the lines is smaller, or comparable to the effective linewidth. The Zeeman shift of the levels becomes comparable to the width of the lines at intensities of the magnetic field of about 100 Gauss. At very large powers, we expect to see a saturation of the cross section, together with the modifications predicted in Ref. 15 of our third Gamma-Optical paper.

Due to imperfect preparation of the samples, the cross section of the two photon process could be lower than that predicted in Eq. 1 by the ratio of the natural linewith, Γ, to the effective linewidth, Γe. On the other hand, the ratio of the cross sections σ(2) and σ(1) is determined by the natural linewidth, as written in Eq. 2, because the single-photon, Breit-Wigner cross section, is also reduced by the same ratio Γ  /  Γe.

A low frequency ω2 results in lower power requirement Φ2 for a given branching ratio B, as may be seen from Eq. 1, and a narrow linewidth Γ results in lower power requirement for a given signal to noise ratio Z, as may be seen from Eq. 2.

We have seen that the types of hyperfine interactions create two ranges of frequencies ω2. Beyond 1 GHz, which corresponds to a wavelength of 30 cm, in the region of the dipole and quadrupole interaction, the high values of the power density Φ2 are most conveniently obtained by the microwave-cavity technique.

This technique is not appropriate at the lower frequencies in the range of 10 MHz, because the size of the cavity, which is determined by the wavelength of the oscillating field, becomes impracticable. But, going back to the bases of the interaction between the gamma ray photon and the nucleus, mediated by an external applied field, we see that all that is necessary for the interaction mediated by the magnetic sublevels is the presence of a magnetic field H2, oscillating with the frequency ω2. Currents oscillating in conductors create such magnetic fields, which are not electromagnetic waves. We have in fact an LC circuit, and, if we assume the volume of the capacitor and of the inductor to be comparable, then the amplitude of the magnetic field in the inductor is comparable (in CGS units) to the amplitude of the electric field in the capacitor. A magnetic field of 100 Gauss corresponds to an electric field of 100 statvolt/cm, or 30 kV/cm. The energy periodically transferred between the inductor and capacitor is H2 / 8π erg/cm3. Assuming H=100 Gauss, a volume of 102 cm3, and a Q-factor of the LC circuit of 100, the input power in the circuit is, at a frequency of 100 MHz, of about 1 kW. The equivalent energy flux Φ2 corresponding to the field H2 of 100 Gauss is of about 106 W/cm2.

For illustrative purposes we chose here the 6.2 keV, 6.8 μsec line of 181Ta, which has a single-photon cross section of 1.73  ×  10- 18 cm2; 181Ta has a good natural abundance (99.99 %), the 6.2 keV level is populated by the decay of 181W, which has a half-life of 140 days and is obtained by neutron irradiation of 180W. The branching ratio B corresponding to a field H2 of 100 Gauss and a frequency ω2 of 10 MHz is B  ≈  10- 3. The cross section of the two-photon process expected under these conditions is σ(2)  ≈  10- 22 cm2, because of the broadening of the lines due to imperfect sample preparation and to the power broadening. The ratio Z = σ(2)  /  σ(1)±  ω2 is under these conditions, Z  ≈  10.

The expression for the branching ratio B and the signal to noise ratio Z were derived by assuming Lorentzian profiles for the two modes of the electromagnetic field. If the sampples are immersed in an oscillating magnetic field, it can be seen from the basic equations for the amplitude of a two-photon process that, if the transition is mediated by the magnetic sublevels, the branching ratio is

[formula]

which is similar to Eq. 1, since the equivalent energy flux is [formula]

The relatively high values of the branching ratio B and the good values of the signal to noise ratio Z obtained with a relatively low imput power which may be tuned by varying the capacitance in the LC circuit suggest that the experimental approach to the gamma-optical absorption be focused on processes compensated by smaller frequencies, like the isomeric shift and the second order Doppler shift, and involving narrow lines.

We have to obtain first the resonance when the frequency of the oscillating magnetic field corresponds to the isomeric shift between the source and absorber. Then, if a static uniform magnetic field is superposed to the oscillating magnetic field, we expect to see a plateau of the two photon cross section at lower values of H2, and a decrease of the cross section as 1 / H2 as the intensity of the static field is increased, corresponding to the fact that the Zeeman splitting becomes larger than the value of the frequency ω2 determined by the isomeric shift. Finally, without the static field, increasing the intensity of the oscillating field, we expect to obtain the saturation of the cross section and to see the changes in the shape of the line described in Ref. 15 of the third Gamma-Optical paper.

There is, of course, complete symmetry between compensating the detuning in source or absorber. Yet we suggest that the source be immersed in the oscillating field, in order to obtain the experimental confirmation of the nuclear Raman scattering, which is more close to a tunable gamma ray source, and is somewhat related to a gamma-ray laser.

Due to the relatively large values of the branching ratio, B, - a B = 10- 4 is probably not difficult to obtain -, apparently there is no problem with the counting rate, so that weak radioactive source, say 1 mCi, can be used (1 Ci=3  ×  1010 disintegrations/sec). The absolute value of the two photon cross section is in the range of 10- 23 cm2, and is comparable to other scattering processes, like the Compton scattering and the photoelectric effect. But we may take the advantage of the fact the fluorescence radiation has a definite energy, while the Compton scattered radiation has a continuous spectrum, and to discriminate energetically between the signal and the noise. The resolution of the gamma-ray detectors in the region of interest in Mössbauer spectroscopy is good, it seems to be ≈  100 eV. For the single-photon off-resonance scattering, the ratio Z is higher than 1 at larger magnetic intensities. At lower intensities where Z < 1 other discrimination techniques are available, such as the comparing of the signals when the magnetic power is off, and on.

Since the frequency ω2 is in the range 10 MHz the width of the line has to be in the range 1 μsec. There are three narrow lines in Mössbauer spectroscopy, namely 67Zn, 93.3 keV, 9.2 μsec, 4.93  ×  10- 20 cm2, 73Ge, 13.3 keV, 3.9 μsec, 0.76  ×  10- 20 cm2, 181Ta, 6.2 keV, 6.8 μsec, 1.73  ×  10- 18cm2. The best candidate seems to be 181Ta. In this case, an isomeric shift of 1 mm/sec is equivalent to 2.07  ×  10- 8 eV, or 5.0 MHz. Many useful informations on the spectroscopy of the 6.2 keV gamma ray of 181Ta and related isomeric shifts can be found in the cited reference.

In conclusion, the gamma-optical experiment requires an LC circuit operating in the range of 10 MHz, with an inductor providing magnetic fields of the order of 10 Gauss, the circuit being tunable by the variation of the capacitance C; the narrow-line sources and absorbers; and conventional gamma-ray equipment. Since the frequency of 10 MHz is in the radio frequency range, difficulties could arise only from the magnitude of the field. Seemingly, a magnetic field of 1 Gauss, which is equivalent to 300 V/cm, is sufficient for the experiment.