plus 1pt minus 1pt

A Case Study of Gender Bias at the Postdoctoral Level in Physics, and its Resulting Impact on the Academic Career Advancement of Females

Sherry Towers BSc MSc PhD Purdue University Department of Statistics West Lafayette, IN 47907-2066 stowers@purdue.edu

This case study of a typical U.S. particle physics experiment explores the issues of gender bias and how it affects the academic career advancement prospects of women in the field of physics beyond the postdoctoral level; we use public databases to study the career paths of the full cohort of 57 former postdoctoral researchers on the Run II Dzero experiment to examine if males and females were treated in a gender-blind fashion on the experiment.

The study finds that the female researchers were on average significantly more productive compared to their male peers, yet were allocated only 1/3 the amount of conference presentations based on their productivity. The study also finds that the dramatic gender bias in allocation of conference presentations appeared to have significant negative impact on the academic career advancement of the females.

The author has a PhD in particle physics and worked for six years as a postdoctoral research scientist, five of which were spent collaborating at Fermilab. She is currently completing a graduate degree in statistics.

Introduction

35 years ago, when the U.S. academic anti-discrimination law Title IX was first enacted, women with doctoral degrees in the fields of science rarely made it to the faculty level, and physics was the worst of these fields in this respect. Over the past few decades some advances have been made in all fields of science in the increase in the fraction of women at the faculty level. Today however physics still ranks as the worst of the fields of science in this respect (see reference Nelson (2005)), and it is clear that Title IX has so far had little impact on dramatically increasing the participation and retention of women in physics, unlike the impact it has had on other fields such as athletics (see references USGAO (2004) and Rolison (2003)).

A law such as Title IX can improve the retention of women in physics only if the reasons for gender inequities in academic career advancement are primarily due to gender discrimination in the field rather than free career path choices made by physicists. For example, as hypothesized in 2005 by Dr.Larry Summers, then president of Harvard, if women innately prefer non-scientific fields and/or are innately incapable of performing scientific research at the standards required at the higher echelons of the field, there is nothing an anti-discrimination law can do to retain them in the field. As has been frequently noted in the hot debate surrounding Summers' comments, disentangling the reasons for the continuing gender inequities in scientific academic career advancement is a complex process, especially when one tries to determine the factors that appear to have the most influence on career paths, and whether or not those factors are gender dependent and/or within the control of the scientist.

Relying upon survey data for such studies unfortunately carries the dangers of survey bias. Ideally a data set is needed that allows for unbiased assessment of a scientist's productivity, career advancement perks awarded to the scientist, and the eventual career path of the scientist. Even better is such a data set that follows a full cohort of scientists of about the same age who work under the same power infrastructure during the same period of time.

Just such an analysis was performed 10 years ago by Wenneras and Wold (1997). In their landmark study they investigated whether the Swedish Medical Research Council (MRC), one of the main funding agencies for biomedical research in Sweden, evaluates women and men on an equal basis. Their study examined the productivity of the applicants, and showed that female applicants for postdoctoral fellowships were strongly disfavored over men with the same productivity. Wenneras and Wold also examined the impact of "socialization" on the academic career advancement prospects of females, and they found that females who were socially connected to one or more members of the MRC were much more likely to be awarded a postdoctoral fellowship.

This study is similar in many respects to that of Wenneras and Wold, except that we examine a cohort of postdoctoral researchers in particle physics rather than biomedicine; in our study we examine a richly detailed set of public online databases maintained by the Run II Dzero experiment, a typical U.S. particle physics experiment in both its size and infrastructure. These databases allow any member of the general public to delve surprisingly deeply into the daily workings of the experiment. For instance, the Run II Dzero experiment maintains a public searchable online comprehensive database that keeps track of internal Run II Dzero papers; these papers document the ongoing work of each researcher on the experiment, and the number of such papers each researcher writes is an excellent measure of his or her productivity since all collaborators on the experiment are expected to document their work in a timely fashion. In addition, the experiment maintains an online public database that keeps track of which Run II Dzero collaborators are allotted presentations at professional physics conferences. Conference presentations provide young researchers much needed exposure to potential future employers, yet collaborators on the experiment can give a conference presentation only if they are allowed to do so by the upper administration of the experiment.

In our study we follow the career paths of the full cohort of postdoctoral researchers who collaborated on the Run II Dzero experiment between 1998 and the end of 2006, and who have since moved on to another job. In this study, similar to Wenneras and Wold, we assess the productivity of each researcher in our sample, and then examine whether or not the reward (in this case conference presentations, in the case of Wenneras and Wold, postdoctoral research grants) is gender-blind. We also determine whether or not the number of physics conference presentations allocated to a female researcher is associated with her prospects of academic career advancement.

In addition, similar to Wenneras and Wold, we assess the "socialization" of each researcher in our sample, in this case through examination of the average number of co-authors with whom each researcher publishes. We determine whether or not the socialization of a female researcher is associated with her prospects of academic career advancement.

Our cohort of past researchers on the Run II Dzero experiment consists of 48 males and 9 females. Before we continue, it is worthwhile to briefly discuss the issue of small sample sizes and whether or not information regarding discriminatory bias can be gleaned from this sample. In order to make definitive statements about differences between males and females on the basis of a relatively small sample of females we use the 48 males as a reference to which we can compare the properties of a particular female. As we will describe in the analysis section of this paper, we can form a robust statistical test to determine if a property of a particular female (such as productivity) is less than or greater than that of a typical male. Thus, rather than relying solely upon averages of data to compare males to females (a procedure which is somewhat limited by our small sample of females), we will instead predominantly be using these statistical comparison tests.

To examine the properties of males and females who move on to faculty positions compared to those who do not, we develop separate linear regression models for the males and females that predict the probability of becoming a professor with a linear combination of the measures of researcher productivity, socialization, and conference reward ratios. We trim each model to obtain the most parsimonious model that best describes each group, and determine the model variables that appear to be most significant. We then determine whether or not the variables that best predict academic career advancement are gender dependent.

In the following sections we will describe the Run II Dzero experiment and its administrative infrastructure, followed by a description of the selection of the cohort of postdoctoral researchers used in this study, and a description of the analysis of the data.

Run II Dzero: A Typical U.S. Particle Physics Experiment

Run II of the Dzero experiment is a multi-institutional international collaboration of almost 700 experimental particle physicists, based at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab) near Chicago, Illinois. This experiment is a typical U.S. particle physics experiment in both its size and administrative infrastructure.

Run II of the Dzero experiment began taking data in March 2001 and is expected to continue taking data until sometime approximately between 2008 and 2010. The physics results produced by the Dzero experiment are quite diverse, and there are expected to be over 100 papers associated with these results published in refereed journals during Run II of the experiment.

The Run II Dzero experiment is a sister experiment to the Run II CDF experiment, which is also based at Fermilab. In many respects, the two experiments are essentially in competition to be the first to produce various physics results. Because of the keen competitive nature of the two experiments, a need is felt to disseminate significant results in very short order. Thus physics results produced by the experiments are almost always first disseminated to the outside world via one or more presentations given at professional physics conferences (which happen regularly throughout the year), followed later by publication in refereed journals.

Collaborators on the Run II Dzero experiment may give conference presentations only if they are given permission to do so by the upper administration of the experiment. This autocratic practice is typical among particle physics experiments in America, although the exact details of how conference presentations are allocated vary from experiment to experiment.

Conference presentations are important to the career advancement prospects of postdoctoral particle physicists primarily because they give a young physicist much needed positive exposure to future employers (important because postdoctoral positions are inherently temporary). Conference presentations are also important to career advancement because the names of all of the several hundred collaborators are included on the author list of refereed publications. The names appear in alphabetical order only, and there are no first authors. This is because particle physics in theory strives to be an egalitarian field where the contributions of all physicists in the collaboration are given equal merit.

Unfortunately, this results in a system where physicists outside the experiment have difficulty in determining which physicists were primary participants in a Run II Dzero analysis. Conference presentations provide one of the only means available to disentangle this; the allocation of a conference presentation on the topic of a particular analysis states to the outside world that the presentor was ostensibly a primary participant in the work, and that the upper administration of the experiment considers the presentor to be an active and productive collaborator.

At Run II Dzero, conference presentations are allocated by a panel of 6 to 8 people who are appointed by the upper administration of the experiment. The minutes of the meetings in which the conference presentation allocations are decided are not made public to the collaborators on the experiment. It is a system that may unfortunately be prone to potential cronyism and patronage; both in who gets appointed to the panel, and to whom the panel allocates conference presentations.

Work done by researchers collaborating on the experiment is divided into physics and "service work". Service work includes tasks such as detector development and operation, calibration and alignment of the detector, and other tasks such as algorithm development for particle recognition. Service work must necessarily be performed to ensure that the experiment runs smoothly. Ostensibly, all collaborators on the experiment are expected to contribute to service work for at least 12 hours per week. For junior physicists, such as postdoctoral researchers, the type of service work they perform (and the amount of service work they do) is usually not their decision. This is instead dictated by the upper administration of the experiment and/or their employer. Service work is generally viewed as a necessary evil by those collaborating on the experiment, since such work almost never in and of itself produces publications in refereed journals. Service work is thus not usually amenable to the academic career advancement of junior physicists, because these researchers typically must show that they are capable of co-ordinating a comprehensive independent physics research program in order to progress. In fact, as we will see later, the more service work a researcher performs, the more it negatively impacts their probability of academic career advancement.

In contrast, work done on physics generally results in publications in refereed journals, and indeed such publications are the raison d'être of the experiment. Physics analysis work is normally much more amenable to the career advancement of a postdoctoral researcher since the resulting journal publications associated with their work can be listed on their vita, and such work shows that the postdoctoral researcher would likely be capable of overseeing an independent physics research program as a faculty member.

Junior physicists are sometimes given freedom to choose which physics analyses they work upon, but often subtle or overt influence is put upon them by the administration of the experiment and/or their employer to work on specific physics analyses. Junior physicists who are well mentored and/or well connected on the experiment often are able to work on "hot" (high-profile) physics analyses. Competition to work on these high-profile analyses is usually intense and one of the few ways a junior physicist can become involved in such analyses is via help from a mentor who is actively engaged in promoting the career advancement of their protégé(e).

A full version of the Run II Dzero governance document, including information on the experiment's policy for the allocation of conference presentations and service work requirements, can be found at http://d0server1.fnal.gov/projects/Spokes/documents/d0_manage_oct00.html As of March 2007 this page was publicly accessible.

Data Selection

Since 2002 the Run II Dzero experiment has maintained, on an approximately annual basis, lists of postdoctoral researchers then currently serving on the Run II Dzero experiment. The lists include the name of the institute employing the researcher, along with their start date. These lists show that Run II Dzero postdoctoral researchers were hired almost exclusively after 1998. The Run II Dzero experiment also maintains a list of past postdoctoral researchers that includes all of the above information, along with the researcher end date and job position obtained after the completion of the postdoctoral term.

Using these combined sources of information, along with the changing membership of past Dzero author lists on published papers, supplemented with information publicly available on the internet, we compiled a list of past postdoctoral researchers on the Run II Dzero experiment. Information gleaned from the internet included, amongst other things, vitae and/or current employment of past Dzero postdoctoral researchers, and lists of researchers previously employed by Dzero institutions. The author made every effort using the above data to ensure that the resulting list of past Run II Dzero postdoctoral researchers is as comprehensive as possible.

In this study we focus on postdoctoral researchers who were hired on or after 1998, served as researchers on the Run II Dzero experiment for at least two years (such that they would appear on the Dzero author list, and also have a significant period of time invested in that position), and who performed research only (or almost exclusively) on the Run II Dzero experiment during the tenure of their research position (such that their career path would be influenced primarily by their work on Run II Dzero, and not on some other experiment). Additionally, we only examine Caucasian researchers in this study to avoid any confounding of our results due to potential additional racial bias.

Collection of data for this study was completed in early 2007. Thus only postdoctoral researchers who had moved on to a different job by the end of 2006 are considered in this study.

In order to ensure that a researcher's presence and participation in collaboration at the laboratory is not limited by geographic constraints (requiring international travel, for instance), we require all researchers in the sample to be employed by U.S. institutions.

It should be noted that nearly all the postdoctoral researchers included in this study were employed by U.S. universities rather than by Fermilab; these researchers were based at the laboratory to perform research there, but were not actually paid by the laboratory itself. Yet, as described above, many aspects of their day-to-day working lives were controlled by the administrative infrastructure of the experiment rather than the administrative infrastructure of the universities that employed them.

The final sample of past postdoctoral researchers consists of 48 males and 9 females. The years-spent-in-postdoctoral-position distribution of the two samples is statistically similar (males and females spend an average of [formula] and [formula] years in their position, respectively). 16 out of the 48 males, and 4 out of the 9 females went on to faculty positions, respectively.

Analysis

The following sections examine gender differences in researcher productivity, conference rewards, and socialization. We then build linear models based on these variables to predict the academic career outcomes of males and females.

Researcher Productivity

The Run II Dzero experiment maintains a searchable online comprehensive database that keeps track of internal Run II Dzero papers; these papers document the ongoing work of each researcher on the experiment. All researchers on the Run II Dzero experiment are expected to document their work in internal papers on a regular basis, such that their work can be collaboratively shared with the rest of the people participating on the experiment. We thus use the number of internal papers authored or co-authored by each researcher in our sample as a measure of their productivity. We divide the internal papers into papers documenting physics analyses, and those documenting service work to the collaboration.

Interesting differences between the productivity of the males and females in our sample our seen; 24 of the males (exactly half the sample of males) produced fewer internal papers per year than the least productive female in the sample. The higher productivity of the females appears to translate into somewhat greater chances of career advancement; 16 (33%) of the 48 males went on to become faculty members, whereas 4 (44%) of the 9 females became faculty members (however, it should be noted that the difference between these two fractions is not statistically significant). Of the 24 males who were at least as productive as the least productive female, 11 (46%) became faculty members. This similarity between the fractions of females and "equivalently productive" males who become faculty appears at first blush to be a sign of equity in promotion and hiring, where hard work is rewarded with career advancement. However, as we will see below, the productivity of females is significantly higher even than that of the typical male in this somewhat mis-named "equivalently productive" sample of males.

As an aside, we note that 20% of the 24 males who produced almost nothing nevertheless went on to faculty positions, and that 19/24 (79%) of these males were allocated at least one conference presentation, whereas only 6/9 (66%) of the females were allocated conference presentations despite their very high productivity. In fact, the mean number of presentations per year awarded to these males slightly exceed the mean number awarded to the females, and the conference reward ratio for the unproductive group of males is over four times greater than that of the females (p < 0.1%).

Table [\ref=tab:comp] displays the averages of measures of productivity for the full sample of males and females. Also shown is the standard error on each average, and in brackets by each average is the correlation of each variable to the probability that a female or male becomes a faculty member. We see that the probability that a male advances up the academic career ladder is significantly correlated to his total and physics productivity For females, the probability that they will become a professor is significantly anti-correlated to the fraction of their productivity devoted to service work.

It has been mentioned above that the nature of a particle physics collaboration requires that all collaborators document their work in a timely fashion such that it can be shared with their collaborators. However, if there in fact exists some type of work that does not necessarily produce documentation in the form of internal papers, that type of work is presumably performed equally by females and males (under the assumption of no gender bias). Thus it cannot be argued that internal papers do not form a measure of productivity; internal papers may not be an absolute measure of productivity, but they give an equitable assessment of how much relative work males and females are performing in the collaborative environment.

In the last column of the table we show "one-sided significance test probabilities" that use the 48 males as a reference sample to test whether a particular variable for females is significantly less than (or greater than) that of the typical male. Using researcher productivity as an example, we first examine the productivity of a particular female and determine how many males have productivity less than hers. If a particular female is much more productive than most males, the fraction of males with productivity less than hers will be close to 1. Because the sample size of 48 males is quite large, this is a robust statistical test (see references Epstein (1954), and Coberly and Lewis (1972)) We will call this probability an "upper-side" significance test probability and denote it by Pfemale > males. We interpret this as a probability that tests the hypothesis that a particular variable for a female was randomly drawn from the corresponding reference distribution for the males. If females are the same as males, this probability will be uniformly distributed between 0 and 1, but if females are on average quite different than males for some variable, the corresponding upper-side test probability will either be close to 0 or close to 1.

To combine the individual probabilities for each of the 9 females to obtain the overall Pfemales > males for the full sample of females, we begin by multiplying all of these probabilities for the individual females to obtain [formula], where N is the number of females. The overall Pfemales > males probability is then (see reference Fisher (1948))

[formula]

Under the null hypothesis that the males and females have the same underlying probability distribution for that variable, the Pfemales > males value will be uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. In our example, if the overall upper-side test probability for the productivity of the female sample is very close to 1, we can conclude that the cohort of females appears to have significantly higher productivity than that of the typical male.

Note that sometimes the means between the males and females may not differ significantly for some variable, but Pfemales > males is significant (say, larger than 0.90). This merely indicates that males and females have differently shaped data distributions for that variable, but those distributions happen to have similar means. Thus it can be seen that the upper-side test probability provides more information than just a simple comparison of averages between groups because it includes information about possible differences in the shapes of the distributions of the two groups.

Similar to Pfemales > males, we can define a "lower-side" significance test probability Pfemales < males. For instance, if a particular female has a much smaller conference reward ratio than most males, the fraction of males with conference reward ratios greater than hers will be close to 1. We denote this lower-side test probability by Pfemale < males, and again we combine the lower-side test probabilities for each of the females to form an overall lower-side test probability, Pfemales < males for the sample of 9 females.

For large reference samples, Pfemales > males approaches 1 - Pfemales < males. In this analysis we quote the maximum of the upper- and lower-side probabilities, because statistical complications arise in the assessment of a one-sided test probability for the full sample of females when the one-sided test probability for at least one of the females is zero. These statistical complications are beyond the scope of this paper.

From the one-side test probabilities in the Table [\ref=tab:comp] we see that females appear to be significantly more productive than males for all measures of productivity, and perform significantly more service work (on average around 40% more service work than males). As an aside it should also be noted that even if we compare the productivity of the females to that of the "equivalently productive males" (ie; males with productivity at least as large as that of the least productive female) we find that Pfemales > males = 0.95. Thus even these "equivalently productive" males do not on average meet the high productivity standards of the females.

We note from the one-sided tests that the females are significantly more productive than males for all productivity measures, even though the averages of some productivity measures (such as the number of physics internal papers produced per year) appear to be somewhat similar; this is due to the different shapes of the productivity distributions of the males and females; nearly all the females are highly productive, whereas 1/2 the males produce almost nothing, somewhat less than half are moderately productive, and a select few are extremely productive. Since the females have a greater physics productivity than the bulk of the males, the upper-sided test probability is high despite the similarity in the means of the physics productivity distributions.

Allocated Conference Presentations

The Run II Dzero experiment maintains a public searchable online comprehensive database that keeps track of which Run II Dzero collaborators are allotted presentations at particular conferences. In this study we use this database to determine how many conference presentations were allocated to Run II Dzero postdoctoral researchers in our sample. We divide the conference presentations into those devoted to physics only, and those devoted to service work topics.

As previously mentioned, conference presentations are important to the career advancement prospects of postdoctoral particle physicists because giving a presentation at a large physics conference gives a young physicist much needed exposure to future employers (important because postdoctoral positions are inherently temporary), and they also announce to the outside world (either rightly or wrongly) that the researcher played a significant role in the analysis being presented.

Since conference presentations are ostensibly allocated to those who play roles in the completion of an analysis, we would expect that the number of conference presentations allocated is directly related to the productivity of the researcher. We thus define a conference presentation "reward ratio" as

[formula]

The addition of 1 in the denominator is needed to ensure that the reward ratio is defined for people who are awarded conference presentations despite zero productivity (which occurs for some males).

In a similar fashion we can define a physics conference presentation reward ratio as

[formula]

Table [\ref=tab:comp] displays the averages of the total and physics conference reward ratios for the full sample of males and females.

We can see from the results of the table that there is a dramatic and significant gender bias in the allocation of conference presentations; on average males have a conference reward ratio around 3 times that of females. The physics conference reward ratio is also gender biased, with males receiving over twice the physics conference presentations per physics internal paper than females.

We note that the probability that a female moves on to a faculty position is significantly correlated to her physics reward ratio. It thus appears that the gender-bias in the allocation of conference presentations appears to detrimentally impact the ability of females to move on to faculty positions. As we will see later when we build a linear regression model to predict the career advancement of females, we find that it is indeed the case that the dearth of physics conference presentations detrimentally impacts the academic career advancement prospects of females.

Researcher Socialization

Most Run II Dzero internal papers are produced by multiple co-authors, and just like the refereed papers produced by the experiment there are no first authors on these internal papers; the co-authors are simply listed alphabetically. There are literally hundreds of collaborators on the experiment, and a measure of how socialized each researcher is within the collaboration is the number of people with whom they typically co-author papers. It is not unusual for some internal papers to have in excess of 20 to 30 authors, particularly papers that describe high-profile physics analyses.

The effective number of internal papers a research produces is defined as

[formula]

The socialization coefficient of the researcher is defined as

[formula]

A socialization coefficient near 0 indicates that the researcher normally publishes alone, whereas a coefficient near 1 indicates the researcher normally collaborates with large groups of people. In a similar fashion we can use the effective and total number of internal physics papers produced by each researcher to define a physics socialization coefficient. And similarly we can define a service work socialization coefficient.

Table [\ref=tab:comp] shows the mean values of the total, physics, and service work socialization coefficients for females and males.

We note from the table that there do not appear to be significant gender-dependent differences in service work socialization, and that service work socialization is not correlated with becoming a professor. In fact, male or female, become a professor or not, the average service work socialization is consistently about 0.40.

However, we see that for both males and females a high degree of physics socialization is significantly correlated with becoming a professor, and that on average females appear to have a significantly higher physics socialization coefficient than males. In fact, females who become physics professors have almost exactly twice the average physics socialization of females who do not. As we will see later when we build a linear regression model to predict the career advancement of females, we find that it is indeed the case that a low physics socialization coefficient detrimentally impacts the academic career advancement prospects of females.

Service work and physics socialization are not significantly correlated for either gender, leading us to conclude that personal preference for working in small or large groups (which would apply to both physics and service work) is not apparent.

Modeling the probability of academic career advancement

For males and females we develop separate binomial regression models that predict the probability of becoming a professor as a function of the linear combination of physics and service work socialization, physics and service work productivity, total and physics conference rewards, and the fraction of productivity devoted to service work. To reduce multicollinearity between the variables used, we normalize each of them using the mean and standard error of the male data. We then trim each model using Akaike's Information Criterion (AIC) (see reference Kutner et al. (2005)) to obtain the most parsimonious model that describes the data with minimal residual variance.

For the males, the best model is a linear combination of physics and service work productivity, physics and service work socialization coefficients, and the fraction of productivity devoted to service work. All the coefficients in the model corresponding to these terms are significant to [formula]. This model correctly predicts the career outcome of 40 out of the 48 males, and has R2 = 0.51.

The best model for females is a linear combination of their physics conference reward ratio and their physics socialization coefficient. The coefficients in the model for these two terms are both significant to [formula]. This model correctly predicts the career outcome of 8 out of the 9 females, and has R2 = 0.59.

The variables that best predict academic career advancement are gender dependent; the reasons for this are primarily based on the differing productivity distributions for the males and females; as noted before, exactly half the 48 males have lower productivity than the least productive female. The females are generally all highly productive and the spread in their productivity is small. In contrast, there is a wide spread in the productivity of the males. Because the females in general all have similar productivity, productivity clearly cannot play a role in deciding which females move on to faculty positions. However, for the males, it potentially can (and does) have an impact on career advancement. In fact, the physics productivity of males has a significantly larger impact on the career outcome of the male researchers than any other variable included in the male model. The coefficient for service work productivity in the male model is much smaller in magnitude (and is also negative), meaning that service work productivity is much less important compared to physics productivity to the career advancement of males. If we add the fraction of productivity associated with service work to the model for the females we find that the coefficient for that variable is also negative in the model, indicating that service work appears to act as an impediment to the career advancement prospects of females as well.

Also note that the best model for the males does not include a conference reward ratio, but the model for the females does. This is perhaps because the males have conference reward ratios 2 to 3 times that of the females, thus it is possible that the positive exposure to potential future employers reaches an asymptotic maximum after a few conference presentations are allocated to a postdoctoral researcher, and after that the allocation of any extra conferences does not provide any additional meaningful exposure. The number of conferences allocated to each female is on average so small that every conference appears to provide critical exposure to potential future employers.

One wonders how many more females could become faculty members if the allocation of physics conference presentation was gender-blind, and based purely on physics productivity. To get some idea of this, we look at the physics productivity of each female, and then find the male that has physics productivity closest to this. We then replace the conference reward ratio of the female with that of this male. We then use our model for our females to predict the career outcomes of these 9 "non-discriminated-against" theoretical females and find that 6 out of 9 are predicted to move on to faculty positions (compared to 4 out of 9 in reality).

The coefficients corresponding to the physics socialization term in the male and female models are statistically indistinguishable, and both are positive. Thus physics socialization coefficients close to 1 correspond to significantly higher probability of becoming a professor in both models. For females, physics socialization is almost as critical to academic career advancement as physics conference rewards, whereas physics socialization plays only a minor role in deciding which males move on to faculty positions because of the very strong influence of physics productivity in the male model.

Discussion

Based on a study of the productivity, conference presentation history, and career paths of 57 former postdoctoral researchers on the Run II Dzero experiment, we find quantitative examples of significant gender discrimination.

We find that females were allotted 40% more service work than males, and that the chances of this occurring in the absence of gender bias are less than 1%. This observation that females are significantly more often shunted into service work roles echoes the results of a study performed 27 years ago by Mary Gaillard (1980) on the status of of female physicists at CERN, a very large European particle physics laboratory. Particle physics has not progressed very far in this respect in the last three decades.

We also find that females were significantly more productive than their male peers in both physics and service work, yet were awarded significantly fewer conference presentations; all 9 females in our sample were more productive than 24 out of the 48 males, yet the females had to be on average 3 times more productive than their male peers in order to be awarded a conference presentation. The chances of this occurring in the absence of gender bias are less than 1%. This result is in remarkable concordance with the research of Wenneras and Wold, who found that females in their study had to be on average 2.5 times more productive than their male peers in order to receive a postdoctoral fellowship.

We note that this dearth of allocated conference presentations appears to hinder the ability of otherwise highly qualified females to become faculty members. Conference presentations give young physicists much needed exposure to future employers, and state to the world outside the experiment that a particular researcher is considered to be a productive member of the experiment. It is not surprising then that a dearth of physics conference presentations appears to detrimentally impact the ability of a female to climb the academic career ladder. In fact, our analysis finds that the physics conference reward ratio is the most influential factor that determines which females go on to faculty positions, and which do not. Unlike socialization and productivity, this conference reward ratio is completely out of the control of the researcher, and is thus an effective gate-keeping mechanism that can be used by the upper administration of the experiment to influence or impede the academic career advancement of females.

If the experiment allocated physics conference presentations based on physics productivity rather than gender, we predict that around 50% more females in our cohort would have moved on to faculty positions. It must be stressed that just because roughly equal fractions of males and females in our cohort moved on to faculty positions does not mean that gender equity is evident; the females in our cohort have worked significantly harder than their male peers to achieve this "equity" in academic career advancement, and yet some highly competent female physicists nevertheless appear to be prevented from moving on to faculty positions because of the conference allocation gate-keeping mechanism.

This study finds that the only other significant factor in female academic career advancement is physics socialization; some females are able to significantly socialize themselves into the collaboration, such that they are put on author lists of physics papers with many authors, and this high degree of socialization is strongly associated with their ability to move on to a faculty position. The physics socialization coefficient of these select females is significantly greater than that of the average male, and is nearly twice that of females who do not move on to faculty positions. Again, this result is in concordance with the research of Wenneras and Wold.

It should be noted that the service work and physics socialization coefficients are not significantly correlated for either gender, leading us to conclude that personal preference for working in small or large groups (which would apply to both physics and service work) is not an apparent pattern in our data. Instead, it is quite possible that the high degree of physics socialization of some females reflects the presence of a senior mentor who is actively engaged in promoting the career success of their protégée by ensuring that they work on high-profile physics analyses and are well networked within the social fabric of the experiment. Indeed, previous studies performed by Corcoran and Clark (1986) and Cameron and Blackburn (1981) have shown a significant relationship between academic career success and academic network involvement, combined with sponsorship by senior faculty. It is also possible that some females perform work in large collaborative groups, but without the presence of a strong mentor to ensure that their work receives due credit, their contribution to the group effort is subsequently overlooked on author lists of the internal papers associated with that work; previous studies and literature reviews performed by Bellas (1999) have shown that the gender-biased practice of not giving credit where credit has been earned is common in academia due to differences in how academics view male and female self-promotion and demands for credit for work performed. It is an unfortunate limitation of this study that we do not have anecdotal evidence from the sample of females to prove or disprove these specific hypotheses for this cohort of data.

Another limitation of this study is that it is specific to particle physics, and is also specific to the Run II Dzero experiment; it would be interesting to see equivalent studies performed with data obtained from other experiments with similar administrative infrastructures. It would also be interesting to see such studies performed in other sub-fields of physics.

Summary

This study follows the career paths of a full cohort of 57 postdoctoral researchers who all worked under the same administrative infrastructure during the same period of time. The study determines the factors that appear to have the most influence on the career paths of the members of the cohort, and whether or not those factors are gender-dependent and/or within the control of the researcher. We find that the strongest influence for the males is productivity, which is within the control of the researcher, but that the most significant influence on career path for females is conference allocations, which unfortunately are not in the control of the researcher.

We also find that females were significantly more productive than their male peers in both physics and service work, yet were awarded significantly fewer conference presentations; the females in our cohort had to be on average 3 times more productive than their male peers in order to be awarded a conference presentation. Our study predicts that if conference presentations were allocated by the administration of the experiment in a gender-blind fashion, we would expect that around 50% more of the females in our cohort would have moved on to faculty positions. The gender-biased allocation of conference presentations to collaborators on the experiment appears to be an effective gate-keeping mechanism that chooses which females can move on to faculty positions and which cannot.

Gate-keeping mechanisms such as this can be addressed via enforcement of Title IX because this law unambiguously applies to people conducting research at any federally funded U.S. national laboratory (whether they are employed by the laboratory or not). It is interesting to note that this conclusion is in concordance with that of the 2004 report produced by the U.S. Government Accountability Office, USGAO (2004); the report examined the reasons behind the slow rise of the fraction of women participating in the sciences, and called for greater Title IX compliance in federally funded research activities to address the problem.

Acknowledgements

The author wishes to thank Dr. Suzanne Franks, Dr. Dale Pitman, Professor Stephanie Goodwin of Purdue, and Professor Mary Gaillard of UC Berkeley for insightful discussions related to this work.

Appendix

Some readers of this article may be wondering if the administration of Fermilab has been made aware of this study; they have. In late summer 2006 the author presented the preliminary results of this study in a formal complaint to the Fermilab Equity Office on behalf of all the female postdoctoral researchers collaborating on the Run II Dzero experiment. The laboratory disdained to investigate the complaint despite the fact that many women were affected, and the fact that it was likely the most thoroughly statistically well-founded complaint that office had ever received.

The author has since complained to the Department of Energy Office of Civil Rights (DoE OCR) regarding Title IX non-compliance at Fermilab (which receives federal grant funding through the DoE). It is the responsibility of the DoE OCR to enforce Title IX compliance in their federally funded research activities. In the complaint, the author pointed out that not only did Fermilab disdain to investigate the complaint, but also did not meet even the minimum standards of Title IX compliance (by, for instance, failing to publicly post the name of the Title IX complaint co-ordinator on site, along with information about Title IX and instructions on how to complain about discrimination or harassment under that law). The DoE OCR is currently investigating the complaint.

References

Bellas,M. (1999) Emotional Labor in Academia: The Case of Professors, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Volume 561, pp 96-111. Cameron,S. and Blackburn,R. (1981) Sponsorship and Academic Career Success, Journal of Higher Education, Volume 52, Number 4, pp 369-77. Coberly,W.A. and Lewis,T.O. (1972) A Note on a One-Sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test of Fit for Discrete Distribution Functions, Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Volume 24, Number 1, pp 183-187. Corcoran,M. and Clark,S. (1986) Perspectives on the Professional Socialization of Women Faculty: A Case of Accumulative Disadvantage?, Research in Higher Education, Volume 57, Number 1, pp 20-43. Epstein,B. (1954) Tables for the Distribution of the Number of Exceedances, The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, Volume 25, Number 4 , pp 762-768. Fisher,R.A. (1948) Combining Independent Tests of Significance, American Statistician, Volume 2, Issue 5, pp 30. Gaillard,M.K. (1980) Report On Women In Scientific Careers At Cern, CERN/DG-11, Mar 1980. Kutner,M. et al. (2005) Applied Linear Statistical Models, McGraw-Hill. Nelson,D. (2005) A National Analysis of Diversity in Science and Engineering Faculties at Research Universities, (available at http://cheminfo.chem.ou.edu/faculty/djn/djn.html) Rolison,D. (2003) Can Title IX Do for Women In Science and Engineering What It Has Done for Women In Sports?, APS News, Volume 12. U.S. Government Accountability Office Report (2004) Women's Participation in the Sciences Has Increased, but Agencies Need to Do More to Ensure Compliance with Title IX, GAO-04-639. Wenneras,C. and Wold,A. (1997) Nepotism and Sexism in Peer-Review, Nature 337, pp 341.