=

1.25in .125in .25in

Cosmology with the Space-Luminosity Distribution of Virialized Halos

Introduction

The luminosity function of virialized systems (VS LF) is a relatively unexplored statistical tool.

The VS LF can be used to probe a number of fundamental problems in cosmology, ranging from the efficiency of galaxy formation to the connection between X-ray and optical light in galaxy systems. Moreover the VS LF is more robust at the low-mass end of the clustering hierarchy than is the mass function obtained by traditional estimators such as projected velocity dispersions and X-ray temperatures.

We constructed the VS LF (Marinoni, Hudson & Giuricin, ApJ submitted) after processing, with a weighting scheme, bound objects extracted from the Nearby Optical Galaxy (NOG) catalog (Giuricin et al. 2000). NOG is a statistically controlled, distance-limited (czLG  ≤   6000 km/s) and magnitude-limited (B≤  14) complete sample of more than 7000 optical galaxies. The sample covers 2/3 (8.27 sr) of the sky ([formula]), a volume of 1.41  ×  106 and has a redshift completeness of 98% (see Marinoni 2001). The NOG sample spans a fair volume of the Universe, but better samples the nearby cosmological space than previous all-sky catalogues.

In Fig. 1, the NOG galaxy distribution is shown using 3D isodensity surfaces of low-density contrast (δ = 1.5) obtained by smoothing with a Gaussian filter of short smoothing length (rs  =  200 km/s). In this way we show the richness of details recovered also on small scales.

In Fig. 1, we have graphically summarized the performance of the algorithms developed in order to reconstruct, in an self-consistent way, galaxy systems and pseudo real-space positions (Marinoni et al. 1998; Marinoni et al. 1999; Giuricin et al. 2000). Most of the NOG galaxies are found to be members of galaxy binaries (which comprise ~  15% of galaxies) or groups with at least three members (~  45% of galaxies). About 40% of the galaxies are left ungrouped (isolated galaxies).

The Virialized Systems Luminosity Function

Having obtained the group catalog, we correct the sample for galaxies falling beyond the NOG magnitude limit and for the completeness of virialized systems of a given richness. The resulting "all-systems" catalog contains ~   4000 objects ( ~   2800 systems with one observed member and ~  1100 groups with at least 2 members). We then calculate a VS LF for virialized systems in the same manner as is usually done for galaxies.

Our results show that the B-band VS LF is insensitive to the choice of the group-finding algorithm, to the peculiar velocity field models with which distances are reconstructed, but is sensitive to the effects of the large-scale environmental density.

We denote by the subscript "s" luminosities of systems (as opposed to individual galaxies). The VS LF (Fig. 2) is well described, over the absolute magnitude range - 24.5  ≤  Ms  +  5 log h75  ≤   - 18.5, by a Schechter function with αs =  - 1.4  ±  0.03, M*s  -  5 log h75 =  - 23.1  ±  0.06 and φ*s = 4.8  ×  10- 4   or by a double-power law: [formula] for Ls  <  Lpl and [formula] for Ls  >  Lpl with [formula], corresponding to Ms  -  5 log h75  =   - 21.85. The characteristic luminosity of virialized systems, Lpl, is ~  3 times brighter than that ([formula]) of the luminosity function of NOG galaxies. In Fig. 2, we show how isolated galaxies dominate the low-luminosity portion of the VS LF, while richer systems dominate in a progressive way the bright end. In the limit of low luminosity the VS LF approaches the galaxy LF. We find that, after correcting for the unseen luminosity, systems with total luminosity Ls < L*gal give a 25% contribution to the total luminosity density ρL of the universe, systems with Ls  <  5L*gal and Ls < 10L*gal contribute by 58% and 75% respectively, while a substantial fraction of luminosity density (10%) is contributed by large systems with more than 30L*gal.

Cosmology with Distribution Functions

The traditional approach for shaping interesting cosmological scaling relationships has been to estimate correlations directly from the data. However this is problematic since different fitting procedures of the same set of data (with often unknown errors) usually lead to discrepant results. Moreover, when errors are large it is almost impossible to disentangle subtle deviations from the traditional null hyphotesis of a logaritmically linear correlation.

On the other hand, comparing statistical distributions of complete set of data is an economic way to obtain robust insights into the physical properties of cosmological objects. Here we show how comparing the VS LF with the Press & Schechter mass distribution function and with the X-ray luminosity function we can link in a continuum some physical properties of galaxy and clusters.

The Mass-to-Light Ratio as a Function of Environment

The traditional assumption in cosmological applications is that mass-to-light ratio (Υ) is approximately constant. By comparing our observed luminosity function with the Press-Schechter mass functions in cold dark matter cosmogonies (SCDM, OCDM, τCDM and ΛCDM) we can turn the problem around and obtain the Υ function directly.

In this way the Υ scaling, which tells us about the efficiency with which the universe transforms matter into light, can be used not only as a traditional estimator of the density parameter Ω0 but also as a diagnostic tool for different models of galaxy formation.

We find that, if a constant Υ is assumed, all cosmological models fail to match our results. In order for these models to match the faint end of the luminosity function, a Υ decreasing as L- 0.5  ±  0.06 with luminosity is required. The value of Υ reaches a minimum around [formula], which corresponds roughly to L*gal. It then remains quite flat over 1.5 dex in luminosity. The behavior at the bright end is model-dependent; for the τCDM model, Υ must remain constant ([formula]), whereas for the ΛCDM model it must increase with luminosity as L0.50  ±  0.26) from the scale of galaxy groups ([formula]) to that of rich clusters ([formula]). This scaling behavior of Υ in a ΛCDM cosmology appears to be in qualitative agreement with the predictions of semi-analytical models of galaxy formation (Benson et al 2000).

The LX vs Ls Function

The problem of deriving the functional form Lx = f(Ls) in galaxy systems can be solved if we assume that all virialized halos detected in the optical also radiate in X-rays and compare their observed LFs. In the regime of faint systems and groups (Ms  >   - 23 + 5   log   h75 or Lx  <  1042h- 275erg  s- 1), we find that the numerical solution is well approximated by [formula]. In the regime of rich groups to clusters (- 25  <  Ms  -  5   log   h75  <   - 23 or 1042  <  Lx(h- 275erg  s- 1)  <  5  ·  1044), the solution is well approximated by [formula]. In Fig. 4 we compare our predictions with observational data. Interestingly we note that the change in the shape of the Lx - Ls relation for Lx  <  1042h- 175erg  s- 1 corresponds exactly to a change in the chemical properties and the spatial distribution of the ICM on the scales of groups (Renzini 1997).

Coupling the mass-to-light ratio with the X-ray-to-optical luminosity ratio and making some minimal and self-consistent hypotheses (virialization, X-ray emission described in terms of thermal bremsstrahlung), we can predict the behavior of fundamental scaling relationships over the group and cluster regimes. In Table 1, we compare our predictions (ΛCDM cosmology) with existing observations. Our results are in agreement with models that predict an initial non-equilibrium phase of preheating during halo formation (Cavaliere, Menci, & Tozzi 1997).