NEUTRON AND PROTON TESTS OF DIFFERENT TECHNOLOGIES FOR THE UPGRADE OF COLD READOUT ELECTRONICS OF THE ATLAS HADRONIC ENDCAP CALORIMETER

The ATLAS Hadronic Endcap Calorimeter

The hadronic endcap calorimeter (HEC) of the ATLAS experiment[\cite=ATLAS] at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is a copper-liquid argon sampling calorimeter in a flat plate design[\cite=LArTDR] [\cite=MPP-2007-237]. The calorimeter provides coverage for hadronic showers in the pseudorapidity range 1.5  <  |η|  <  3.2. The HEC shares each of the two liquid argon endcap cryostats with the electromagnetic endcap (EMEC) and forward (FCAL) calorimeters, and consists of two wheels per endcap.

A HEC wheel is made of 32 modules, each with 40 liquid argon gaps, which are instrumented with active read-out pads. The signals from the read-out pads are sent through short coaxial cables to preamplifier and summing boards (PSB) mounted on the perimeter of the wheels inside the liquid argon cryostat. The PSB boards carry highly-integrated preamplifier and summing amplifier chips in Gallium-Arsenide (GaAs) technology. The signals from a set of preamplifiers are summed to one output signal, which is transmitted to the cryostat feed-through[\cite=MPP-2005-193]. Figure [\ref=PSB] shows a PSB board mounted and connected on the perimeter of a HEC wheel.

Requirements of the HEC cold electronics for the HL-LHC upgrade

The GaAs technology currently employed in the HEC cold electronics has been selected for its excellent high frequency performance, stable operation at cryogenic temperatures, and radiation hardness. The radiation hardness specifications were defined for ten years of operation at the LHC design luminosity of 1034  , including a safety factor of ten. For the high-luminosity upgrade of the LHC (HL-LHC), the luminosity is foreseen to increase by a factor of 5-10, effectively eliminating the safety factor. The ATLAS collaboration therefore decided to re-examine the radiation hardness of the current HEC cold electronics and of potential alternative technologies[\cite=Schacht]. Detailed studies of the expected radiation levels after ten years of running under HL-LHC conditions yielded the following requirements (including a safety factor of 10) for the HEC cold electronics:

Neutron fluence of [formula]

Proton fluence of [formula]

Gamma dose of 20 kGy

Tests

The neutron irradiation tests were performed at the e Neutron Physics Laboratory near Prague in the Czech Republic, up to an integrated fluence of [formula]. A 37   proton beam incident on a [formula] target created a somewhat divergent beam of neutrons with a flux density up to [formula]. The proton irradiation test were performed at the Proton Irradiation Facility at the Paul-Scherrer-Institut in Switzerland with a 200   proton beam up to an integrated fluence of [formula]. The transistors were bonded in ceramic casings and mounted on boards, which were then aligned in the particle beams. The three different transistor technologies being tested were Si CMOS FET, SiGe Bipolar HBT (both SGB25V 250nm from IHP), and Triquint CFH800 250nm GaAs FET pHEMT, respectively. The performance of the transistors was monitored during irradiation with a vector network analyzer recording a full set of S-parameters. Beam current measurements and radiation films placed at various distances along the beam were used to determine the particle flux and the beam profile.

Results

The various transistor parameters were calculated from the measured S-parameters using standard small signal circuit models. The transistor parameters were averaged over a certain frequency range to obtain their mean and rms-values for every set of S-parameters. This frequency range extended from 300   to 100  , unless a certain parameter was unstable at low or high frequencies, in which case appropriate cuts were applied. These averaged transistor values were then used to characterize their behaviour as a function of radiation.

Figure 2 summarizes the results for the neutron (top) and the proton (bottom) tests in terms of the appropriate gain parameters. Displayed are the various gain parameters, i.e. the real part of the transconductance gm for the FET transistors and the current gain β for the Bipolar transistors, as a function of the corresponding particle fluence up to the required limit, normalized to the corresponding value before irradiation. We apply a linear fit to the observed radiation dependence, and the relative change of the gain parameter resulting from the fit is quoted in Table 1.

The results show that the alternative technologies under consideration are more radiation hard than the current GaAs technology, in particular for neutron irradiation. However, the loss in gain for the GaAs FETs is only moderate, and could be considered acceptable, especially if occuring uniform across the HEC. Gamma irradiation tests are planned for the near future to complete the radiation hardness tests.