13C NMR study of superconductivity near charge instability realized in β''-(BEDT-TTF)4·CHNO[formula]

Superconductivity appearing in close proximity to magnetism has fascinated researchers because of its unconventional superconducting (SC) pairing mechanisms. For example, in the Ce-based heavy fermion superconductor CeCu2Si2, the Cooper pairs are mediated by magnetic fluctuations that are enhanced near the magnetic quantum critical point (QCP) [\cite=steglich-PRL43] [\cite=mathur-nature394]. A similar scenario has been applied to the interpretation of the SC state in high SC transition temperature cuprate, pnictide, as well as organic superconductors such as (TMTSF)2PF6 [\cite=jerome-physique41] and κ-(BEDT-TTF)2X [\cite=williams-science252] [\cite=murakami-JPSJ69], and successfully explained the physical properties.

Holmes etal. have suggested a novel mechanism that is triggered by an increase in the SC transition temperature Tc of CeCu2Si2 under pressures greater than 3 GPa, at which the system approaches to the second critical point ascribed to a valence instability [\cite=holmes-PRB69]. Theory indicates that the enhanced charge susceptibility near an electric QCP increase Tc. The experimental results that evidence the charge-fluctuations-induced superconductivity is required. Charge ordering is observed in several BEDT-TTF salts with α- and θ- type structures, and some of them undergo the SC transition in the charge-ordered state. A theoretical study shows that an unconventional SC state can be realized in these compounds near charge instability [\cite=merino-PRL87] [\cite=merino-PRL96], as expected for other superconductors observed near magnetic QCPs. Since resistivity and optical experiments clearly reveal the charge instability in BEDT-TTF salts, an investigation of the SC state is essential. However, few such investigations have been reported because the low Tc(≃1 K) value has restricted detailed experiments.

Superconductivity was observed at rather high temperature reaching 9 K in β'' type structure β''-(BEDT-TTF)4· YwithM=Ga,FeandCrandY=CHNOorCH[formula]κ- (BEDT - TTF)Xnearantiferromagnetism,magneticanomalyisabsentfortheseβ"familycompounds,whereastheanomalyassociatedwithchargeorderingisobservedatapproximately100[formula]Hof33[formula]CNMRmeasurementdetectsonlythemagneticproperties,wefoundananomalyassociatedwithchargeinstabilitythroughthemodificationofthelocalspinsusceptibility.ToexaminetheSCpropertiesofβ"salts,wemeasuredthenuclearspin - latticerelaxationtime(T)andKnightshift(K[formula]β"saltwithM=GaandY=CHNO,whichexhibitsuperconductivityat7.5[formula]7.5[formula]1× 0.1× 0.2mm.Thesingle - crystalx - raydiffractionrevealedthatthelongestaxisisparalleltothecrystallinea- axis.FortheNMRexperimentreportedinthisLetter,externalmagneticfieldswereappliedalongtheb- axis,whichisthesecondlongestaxisofthecrystal.Toreducespectralbroadeningduetosamplemisalignment,CNMRspectrawereacquiredforonesinglecrystal.TomeasureT,whichdoesnotrequirehighfrequencyresolution,wealignedthirtysinglecrystalsonaflatsampleholdertoimprovetheNMRsignalintensity.WhenneighboringCnuclearspinsaremagneticallycoupled,theNMRshiftofthe[formula][formula]Cusingthecross - couplingmethodbetweennon - enrichedketoneand[formula]CNMRspectrameasuredinamagneticfieldof9.4T.Asinglepeakwasobservedat250K,atwhichthesystemisinaparamagneticstate.Crystallographically,β"saltspossesseseightnonequivalentCsitesinamagneticfield,whichareduetothemultiplicationofthetwononequivalentBEDT - TTFmoleculesforβ"modification(AandBsitesinFig. ~ (a)),andthetwoCsitesatthecentralC = Cbondofeachmolecule,andanadditionaltwononequivalentmolecularsitescreatedbytheexternalmagneticfield.Whenthefieldisappliedexactlyalongtheglideplane( b),fourNMRpeaksfromfournonequivalentCsitesareexpected,becausethelatersymmetry - breakingeffectofthemagneticfieldissuppressed.Theobservedsingle - peakspectrumisasuperpositionofthesefourspectra.TheabsenceofclearspectralsplittingisduetothesimilarityincrystallographicsitesbetweennonequivalentAandBmolecules,whichisevidentfromthecrystalparameters.Aspectralbroadeningwasobservedat100[formula]40Kbeforemergingagaintoformabroadsinglepeakbelowapproximately20K.Theprogressivedevelopmentofthespectralshapefrom100Kdownto40Kindicatesthataspatialdisproportionandnotperfectchargelocalizationoccursinthecarrierdensityat100Kandevolveswithtemperatures.Thisscenarioisalsoconsistentwiththemoderatetemperaturedependenceoftheelectricresistivitybelow100[formula]Δ ρ betweencharge - richandpoorsitescanbeestimatedfromthespectralsplitat40K.TheNMRfrequencyshiftδ isexpressedintermsofthespinsusceptibility(χ)andthechemicalshift(σ[formula]KisconnectedtoχthroughthehyperfinecouplingconstantA,andenablesustomeasurethelocalchargedensityρbecauseAdependsonρ.First,becauseσisspecifictotheBEDT - TTFmolecule,weemployachemical - shifttensorforα- (BEDT - TTF)I[formula]σforβ"- (BEDT - TTF)·  C6H5NO2 in the field [formula] and find σ as 82 ppm. Next, we assume that the average split-peak position gives the formal charge of BEDT-TTF molecules (ρ = 0.5e), to obtain K = 260ρ. The charge imbalance Δρ is finally estimated to be 0.2e from the peak separation ΔK≃50 ppm, which is in good agreement with Δρ determined by Raman spectroscopy [\cite=yamamoto-PRB77].

In the charge disproportionate state below 100 K, electrons are still itinerant preserving their spin degrees of freedom. We investigated the nature of electronic spin fluctuations by measuring T1, and the results under magnetic fields of 3.6 and 7.0 T are displayed in Fig. [\ref=fig2]. For two fields, we observed an increase in (T1T)- 1 below 50 K down to approximately 10 K. The temperature-dependent (T1T)- 1 contrasts starkly with the Fermi liquid behavior, which is characterized by a temperature-independent (T1T)- 1. In general, (T1T)- 1 is expressed in terms of dynamic susceptibility χ''(q,ω) as

[formula]

and is increased by the enhanced magnetic fluctuations due to strong electron-electron correlations [\cite=moriya-JMMM100]. The increase in (T1T)- 1 above Tc indicates that electron-electron correlations are strong when superconductivity sets in. In the vicinity of charge instability, the dynamic susceptibility can also be enhanced by charge fluctuations, which modify the local charge density, and accordingly, the spin density.

The nuclear spin-lattice relaxation rate measured via 13C NMR can only detect fluctuating magnetic fields at the 13C site, but cannot reveal their origin. Thus, we measured the in-plane resistivity as a complementary probe. A semiconducting behavior was observed in a temperature range (10  ~  100 K), in which (T1T)- 1 increases, as already reported in Ref. [\cite=bangura-PRB72], where the semiconducting behavior is interpreted as the segregation of metallic and semiconducting phases. Instead, based on the NMR-shift data shown below, we propose a uniform electronic state. The increase in resistivity below 100 K is due to the scattering of conduction electrons by low-energy charge fluctuations. For the β'' family of compounds without magnetism, enhanced charge fluctuations in the vicinity of a charge instability increase χ''(q,ω) by spin-charge coupling. The anomaly associated with superconductivity is barely observed at Tc, because (T1T)- 1 start decreasing at 10 K, which is much above Tc(4 ~ T)  =  5.8 K. We discuss the anomalous electronic state below 10 K down to Tc later. Although this anomalous state masks the SC properties, the absence of the Hebel-Slichter peak [\cite=hebel-PR113] slightly below Tc may indicate unconventional superconductivity.

We detected the clear signature of SC properties (i.e., the spin symmetry of Cooper pairs) by measuring the Knight shift. Figure [\ref=fig3](a) shows 13C NMR spectra for temperatures below 11 K. The full spectral weight has shifted below Tc, which indicates bulk superconductivity without phase separation, and therefore a uniform electronic state for the normal state. Figure [\ref=fig3](b) shows the temperature dependence of NMR shift determined by the peak positions. The NMR shift starts decreasing at Tc(4 ~ T)  =  5.8 K, and approaches approximately 100 ppm at 0 K. When the spin susceptibility completely vanishes in the SC state, the NMR shift is identical to σ  =  82 ppm. The suppression of spin susceptibility below Tc and the agreement between the residual NMR shift at the lowest temperature and σ strongly suggest that spin susceptibility is almost reduced to zero in the SC state because of the formation of spin-singlet Cooper pairs. We exclude the spin-triplet scenario for the interpretation of very large value of Hc2. We suggest that an FFLO state may be created above the Pauli limiting field of 12 T. Therefore, a high-field NMR experiment is essential to unravel the high-field SC state.

We now discuss the anomalous electronic state above Tc. In the temperature range Tc < T < 10 K, the decrease in (T1T)- 1 is accompanied by an abrupt increase in resistivity and the spectral width, as indicated by the dashed line in Fig. [\ref=fig4]. Moreover, this increase in the resistivity has been observed in the magneto-resistance at the corresponding temperatures[\cite=bangura-PRB72]. The decrease in (T1T)- 1 could be interpreted as the suppression of the density of states (DOS) by preformed SC pairs as is suggested for high-Tc cuprate superconductors, and κ-(BEDT-TTF)2X. However, the invariance of (T1T)- 1 data in magnetic fields of up to 7 T, which are strong enough to suppress Tc by approximately 30 %, demonstrates clearly that the precursor of SC instability is irrelevant. Instead, we suggest that the normal state DOS is suppressed by a gap in a part of Fermi surface, which is induced by strong electron-electron correlations.

The suppression of the normal-state DOS cannot increase the spectral width. We propose an incommensurate distribution of the local susceptibility as the origin of the spectral broadening below 10 K. The mechanisms resulting in the 10-K anomaly is different from that for the 100-K anomaly. The clear spectral splitting, which appears below 100 K in Raman and NMR spectra, indicates that the charge disproportion is commensurate with the crystalline lattice. The origin of the commensurate charge ordering is often ascribed to the off-site Coulomb interaction, whereas the enhanced charge susceptibility by Fermi-surface nesting can result in an incommensurate charge ordering. We underline that the low-temperature anomaly is caused by the Fermi-surface nesting, and superconductivity occurring subsequently could be induced by the enhanced charge fluctuations. Further experimental and theoretical studies on superconductivity in β''-(BEDT-TTF)4·CHNOwillrevealthephysicsatworknearchargecriticality.Toconclude,wehaveperformedaCNMRexperimentonsingle - crystalsamples,andfoundthatspin - singletsuperconductivityoccursinthechargedisproportionatestate.BecausewecanexcludethesuppressionofPaulidepairingeffectbyparallel - spinpairformation,wesuggestanFFLOstateforthehigh - fieldSCstate.Theincreasein(TT)below50Kdownto10Kprovidesanevidencethattheelectronsarestronglycorrelatedinthenormalstate.AttemperaturesaboveT,wealsoobservedalow - temperatureanomalyin(TT),theNMRlinewidth,andresistivity,andhighlightedtheimportanceofchargefluctuationsinunderstandingsuperconductivityinβ"- (BEDT - TTF)·  C6H5NO2 .

We acknowledge T. Inabe for the x-ray diffraction experiment and H. Kato for the resistivity measurement. This work was partially supported by Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B) (No.23740249).