IACTalks: an on-line archive of astronomy-related seminars

Johan H. Knapen1,2, Jorge A. Pérez Prieto1, Tariq Shahbaz1,2, Anna Ferré-Mateu1,2, Nicola Caon1,2, Cristina Ramos Almeida1,2, Brandon Tingley1,2, Valentina Luridiana1,2, Inés Flores-Cacho1,2,3,4, Orlagh Creevey1,2,5, Arturo Manchado Torres1,2,6, Ignacio Trujillo1,2, Maria Rosa Zapatero Osorio1,2,7, Francisco Sánchez Martnez1,2, Francisco López Molina1, Gabriel Pérez Daz1, Miguel Briganti1, Inés Bonet1

1Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias, E-38205 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain 2Departamento de Astrofísica, Universidad de La Laguna, E-38206 La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain 3CNRS, IRAP, 9 Av. colonel Roche, BP 44346, F-31028 Toulouse cedex 4, France 4Université de Toulouse, UPS-OMP, IRAP, F-31028 Toulouse cedex 4, France 5Laboratoire Lagrange, UMR 7293, CNRS (OCA), Université de Nice Sophia-Antipolis, Nice, France 6Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientficas, Spain 7Centro de Astrobiologa (CSIC-INTA), Ctra. Ajalvir km. 4, 28850 Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain

Introduction

Since April 2008, the Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias (IAC) has been webcasting and archiving the weekly seminars and monthly colloquia about the most exciting topics in astronomy and astrophysics' research. The IAC is one of the leading centres for astrophysical research and related technology development in Spain, and has a staff of over 350, of which over 160 are active in astronomy research.

The seminars cover both observational and theoretical astronomy and include diverse topics such as particle and stellar physics, galaxies and cosmology, and astronomical instrumentation and telescopes. The seminars are aimed at a general astronomical audience and mainly given by postdocs and staff astronomers. The speakers in our special "colloquia" are high-profile scientists and over the years have included leading astronomers from all over the world, covering practically the complete spectrum of current-day astrophysical research.

While most of the archived seminars are on astrophysical research, the IACTalks archive also contains seminars on various topics relating to astronomical telescopes and instrumentation, and programming and (super)computing.

Other on-line seminars include the webcasting and archive service of the Space Telescope Science Institute (https://webcast.stsci.edu/webcast/), going back to 2001, or the recently started seminar series at http://asterisk.apod.com/ampersand/ . IACTalks is complementary to these and other initiatives.

The IACTalks web archive

The archive, accessed via the web address http://iactalks.iac.es (see Fig. [\ref=homepage]), currently contains over 360 seminars, recorded since April 2008. Of these, 45 form part of the "colloquium" series, for which the IAC invites renowned speakers from anywhere in the world to spend a week at the institute to interact with staff and students, and to give a seminar.

The various seminars are organized in 13 categories, and each seminar is labelled with a number of keywords. The web interface allows browsing through the available talks, searching for names or keywords, or browsing by categories (such as galaxies, planetary systems, or the Sun) or series. The latter include recordings of workshops and courses, including the XXIIIrd Canary Islands Winter School, held in November 2011 in Tenerife on the topic of secular evolution in galaxies.

Seminars at the IAC are broadcast over the internet and can be watched either live or in the archived form described here. We capture a direct video feed of the slides as they appear on the screen and a fixed camera also films the speaker during the presentation. Both these videos appear on the webcast, and either can be enlarged to fill the screen of the viewer. Figure [\ref=talk] shows a screenshot of the appearance during playback. We use a web-based player (Flowplayer), so only a HTML5 compliant browser with Adobe Flash is required.

Future improvements

While our current system should work without problems on most browsers, in the near future we plan to release a specific interface for full compatibility with mobile devices, including Apple hand-held devices which do not support Flash technology. We also plan to release integration to social networks.

In addition, we are considering using free on-line services (such as those provided by Google and YouTube) to provide automatically-generated transcripts of all seminars, which can then also be translated automatically into a multitude of languages, and/or superimposed as subtitles. While this will not guarantee accurate reflections of everything a speaker says, especially when jargon is involved, our initial tests have shown that the results of this exercise can make the seminars available to a huge world-wide audience of interested amateur astronomers who lack the language skills to follow a seminar in English, but can get the essence of a presentation when it is supported by subtitles in their own language.

Conclusions

This short note is aimed to announce the launch of the IACTalks website, http://iactalks.iac.es, which yields free and open access to a large archive of seminars, aimed at promoting astronomy and the exchange of ideas by providing high-quality scientific seminars to the astronomical community. The archive of seminars and talks given at the Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias goes back to 2008, and now contains over 360 talks and seminars available by streaming over the Internet. We have described the main features of the website, and outlined future plans for further development.